[www.nature.com/scientificreports](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports)

## OPEN

# Exposure to elevated relative humidity in laboratory chambers

# alters fungal gene expression in dust from the International Space

# Station (ISS)

### Neeraja Balasubrahmaniam

**1,2,3** **, Nicholas Nastasi** **1,2,3** **, Bridget Hegarty4, John M. Horack5,** **Marit E. Meyer6, Sarah R. Haines7 & Karen C. Dannemiller** **2,3,8**\*

### Microorganisms are present in all occupied indoor environments, including homes on Earth and

### within specialized systems like the International Space Station (ISS). Microbes when exposed to

### excess moisture, such as from an unexpected ventilation system failure, can undergo growth that is

### associated with material degradation and negative health effects. However, we do not yet understand

### how exposure of these microbes to excess moisture alters their function. A de novo metatranscriptomic

**study was performed using dust collected from the US air filtration system of the ISS and incubated in** **laboratory chambers on Earth at different equilibrium relative humidity (ERH) levels. Changes in fungal** **function (gene expression) were significantly associated with moisture (adonis2 p = 0.0001). Secondary** **metabolism and fungal growth genes were upregulated (FDR-adjusted p ≤ 0.001, log2FC ≥ 2) at** **elevated ERH compared to 50% ERH. Elevated moisture conditions showed upregulation of aflatoxin** **and fungal allergen genes such as Asp f 4 (log2FC = 26.4, upregulated at 85% ERH compared to 50%)** **and Alt a 7 (log2FC = 2.98, upregulated at 100% ERH compared to 50%). Our results demonstrate that** **understanding microbial functional changes in response to elevated moisture will help develop more** **robust microbial monitoring standards for spacecraft environments to protect astronaut health and** **spacecraft integrity in low-Earth orbit and beyond.**

### Keywords Fungi, Microbial function, Microbiome, Moisture, Mold, Spacecraft

Microorganisms are inherently present in human-occupied environments, such as a spacecraft like the ISS 1,2 . Many organisms are inert, but exposure to some has been associated with human health outcomes related to respiratory illnesses, allergies, and infections 3,4 . Health effects may be intensified due to immune deregulation known to occur during space travel5. The presence of certain microbes also has implications for spacecraft integrity. Damage to equipment and structural materials from bio-destructive bacteria and fungi was observed on the Russian orbital station Mir6. Microbial degradation of critical materials aboard spacecraft could result in system failures endangering the crew members. As we strive to achieve long-term settlements beyond Earth, we must also consider planetary protection from microbes. We need to better understand the qualities of a healthy spacecraft microbiome to inform our design decisions and prevent unintended consequences on long duration missions. About 12,500 different microbial species have been found aboard the ISS7. Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus _sydowii and Penicillium chrysogenum exist on surfaces of the ISS as well as in dust samples collected from the_

1 Environmental Sciences Graduate Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.2Department of Civil, Environmental and Geodetic Engineering, College of Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.3Division of Environmental Health Sciences, College of Public Health, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, College of Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, College of Engineering and John Glenn College of Public Affairs, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135, USA. Department of Civil and Mineral Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A4, Canada. Sustainability Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.\*email: [Dannemiller.70@osu.edu](mailto:Dannemiller.70@osu.edu)

**Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)

* * *

[www.nature.com/scientificreports/](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports/)

ISS 8,9 . These fungal species are commonly associated with house dust and the indoor environment on Earth10. The most abundant bacteria on the ISS are human-associated such as Corynebacterium, Staphylococcus and _Pseudomonas7_. Cultured bacteria from the ISS include Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria, and cultivable fungi include both  Ascomycota and Basidiomycota11. Some of these taxa have been identified as opportunistic pathogens11 and are also present in built environments on Earth7. These taxa require special monitoring due to the unique environment in spacecraft. Microbial growth is the factor most strongly associated with negative human health effects in indoor environments. The presence of water damage, visible mold growth, or moldy odor (indicative of growth) are more strongly associated with health effects than the presence of any specific species or other measured microbial factors 12,13 . Different microbial species may be harmful in different ways, but the occurrence of active growth may be the most crucial factor of all, regardless of taxonomy 14–16 . Microbial growth in the indoor environment is generally limited by moisture availability17. Dust is hygroscopic, quickly absorbing water from the environment, and contains enough nutrients to support microbial growth18. When ambient relative humidity (RH) levels reach a certain threshold, microbial growth will occur within dust 14,19 . On Earth, fungal growth in house dust will occur at and above 80% ERH and growth rates increase with increasing moisture 14,18 . Microbial growth also likely occurs more slowly at lower relative humidity levels20. Microbial growth at elevated relative humidity conditions is not unique to indoor environments on Earth21. Microbes have been found to grow both on the ISS and Mir. Power supply issues during an event on Mir caused an increase in temperature, moisture and minimal air circulation resulting in a free-floating condensed water ball filled with bacteria. Species of Escherichia coli, Serratia marcescens and Legionella were found within the free-floating condensate4. Experience from Mir has informed how we design and manage spacecraft, and the ISS has much better control over relative humidity conditions. However, suboptimal conditions have occurred on the ISS in some specific limited events leading to microbial growth. In 2004, a fabric panel on the Russian segment of the ISS was found to be covered in mold due to increased moisture from hanging wet towels 22,23 . Our prior studies have shown microbial compositional changes with increased moisture in dust from the ISS21, with fungal growth occurring in dust even with short exposures to varying elevated relative humidity24. It is also important to understand what growth might occur during unexpected events such as a temporary ventilation system malfunction that could lead to elevated moisture. Moisture is inherent to an occupied spacecraft due to human emissions and must be carefully controlled. Occupants themselves sweat, bathe, and exhale moisture, and the resulting water vapor and condensation occurs on the ISS and will occur on all future human spaceflight missions. Microbes on Earth growing at elevated ERH conditions are metabolically complex and demonstrate diverse metabolic processes 15,16 . Our previous study16 showed that increased relative humidity conditions are associated with diverse fungal secondary metabolic processes and upregulation of fungal developmental genes in dust from homes across the United States. Such metabolic processes can result in a greater expression of genes that may potentially impact human health. Fungal communities at 100% ERH upregulate a greater number of genes responsible for allergen, mycotoxin and pathogenicity when compared to fungal communities at 85% ERH or 50% ERH 15,16 . However, it is not known if metabolic processes in fungi occur on spacecraft similar to that observed within indoor environments on Earth. The goal of this study is to characterize microbial function (gene expression) that occurs when dust from the ISS is exposed to elevated moisture conditions in laboratory chambers. Dust from the ISS was returned to Earth and incubated under various ERH conditions in controlled laboratory chamber experiments. The RNA extracted from the dust was sequenced to investigate the microbial activity occurring at the various ERH conditions. Gene quantification and differential expression analysis investigated metabolic activity at varying moisture conditions. This information can help inform future spacecraft design and identification of situations that might require remediation.

# Results

## Overview of the metatranscriptomic dataset

A total of 698,885,111 paired-end reads were produced from RNA sequencing. One complete Trinity assembly was constructed to investigate a total of 19 unique samples (Supplementary Table S1). After quality trimming, Trinity assembled a total of 448,821 contigs. The median contig length was 603 base pairs (bp) and 70% of quality trimmed reads mapped back to the full transcriptome.

## Differential expression patterns are similar among relative humidity conditions

Microbial gene expression in samples from all bags at 100%, 85% and 50% ERH cluster by ERH condition (adonis2 p = 0.0001, R2= 0.39) (Fig. 1A, Supplementary Table S3), showing clear separation by ERH condition, as seen between the low ERH (50%) and high ERH (85% or 100%) samples, but not by bag (Fig. 1B). This is also indicated by Spearman correlation heatmap of differentially expressed genes (Supplementary Fig. S1). These results indicate significant differences in gene expression as a function of moisture condition. Higher moisture conditions had a greater number of fungal annotated genes that were upregulated compared to lower moisture conditions. When comparing 100% and 50% ERH, the 100% condition had 2.65 times the number of fungal annotated genes significantly upregulated (FDR-adjusted p ≤ 0.001, log2FC ≥ 2) compared to the 50% upregulated condition. Comparing elevated ERH conditions (either 100% or 85% ERH) to 50% ERH, both the 100% and 85% upregulated ERH conditions had greater metabolic pathway coverage (Fig. 2A, C) based on the KEGG annotations of the upregulated fungal genes than the 50% upregulated condition (Fig.  2B, D, Supplementary Table S4).

**Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)

* * *

[www.nature.com/scientificreports/](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports/)

# (a) (b)

**Fig. 1. Principal component analysis (PCA) of samples from all bags grouped by (a) ERH and (b) bag. Counts**

per million (CPM) values that were log-transformed and row-mean centered were used. Genes having < 10 total reads across samples were filtered out. Colors represent ERH in (a) and Bags in (b). Shapes represent ERH condition. Overlap between samples indicate greater similarity based on distance between samples. A 95% confidence ellipse was added for each ERH condition in (a).

**Fig. 2. Fungal metabolic pathways (a) upregulated at 100% when compared to 50% ERH, (b) upregulated**

at 50% compared to 100% ERH, (b) upregulated at 85% compared to 50% ERH and (d) upregulated at 50% compared to 85% ERH. Metabolic pathways that show overlap between maps (a) and (b) as well as maps (c) and (d) respectively, could potentially be due to a combination of multiple genes having similar functions at different ERH conditions and limitations in fungal genome annotation databases. All metabolic pathway annotations are additionally subject to fungal genome database limitations.

## Secondary metabolic and growth processes are upregulated as moisture conditions increase

Gene expression at each ERH condition shows differences in secondary metabolic processes. When comparing 100% ERH and 85% ERH, the secondary metabolic process GO term i.e., “secondary metabolite biosynthetic process” and “secondary metabolic process” (GO:0044550 and GO:0019748), were enriched at 100% ERH (FDR-

**Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)

* * *

adjusted p = 0.0003 and FDR-adjusted p = 0.002). All the samples associated with the 100% ERH condition cluster
together based on all differentially expressed genes (Fig. 3A). Samples associated with 100% ERH additionally
cluster together based on gene expression associated with secondary metabolism (GO:0019748, GO:0044550)
(Fig. 3B). Although the term “secondary metabolite catabolic process” was enriched at 85% ERH when compared
to 100%, none of the genes had a fungal annotation (either not annotated or from other domains of life); and,
hence, was not examined. Out of the secondary metabolism genes upregulated at 100% ERH (compared to 50%),
7 genes were associated with melanin production (Supplementary Table S6), including the genes arp1 and arp2
(log2FC = 5.5 and log2FC = 10.2, respectively).
GO terms associated with fungal growth (n = 10) were enriched at 85% and 100% ERH, and not at the 50%

p!=!0.0003

\ p!=!0.002)

GO terms associated with fungal growth (n = 10) were enriched at 85% and 100% ERH, and not at the 50%
ERH condition (Fig.  4, Supplementary Table S5). Morphological changes that occur during growth, such as
“spore-bearing structure development” (GO:0075259, FDR-adjusted p = 0.014, enriched at 85% ERH compared
to 50%) and “spore wall assembly” (GO:0042244, FDR-adjusted p = 0.006, enriched at 100% ERH compared
to 85%), were enriched at higher ERH conditions (100% or 85% ERH). The term “reproductive fruiting body
development” (GO:0030582, FDR-adjusted p = 0.014) was also enriched at 85% ERH compared to 50%, having
24 upregulated genes, where all 24 genes had a fungal annotation. We found mitochondria associated processes
(Supplementary Fig. S2) significantly enriched (FDR-adjusted p < 0.05) at all ERH conditions. Mitochondrial
25,26
respiratory processes have potential associations with fungal growth and virulence with mitochondria
accumulating at the tip of growing hyphae26. We found that the 85% ERH condition had 18 times the number of
upregulated fungal genes associated with mitochondrial function as the 50% ERH condition (85% vs 50% ERH
comparison). Although the exact association between mitochondrial processes and ERH are likely complex, these
upregulated genes at 85% ERH (compared to 50%) may be indicative of genes related to mitochondrial processes
occurring in growing fungi especially during hyphal growth, at elevated ERH conditions (Supplementary Fig. S2,
–84
Supplementary Table S5).The term “primary metabolic process” (GO:0044238, FDR-adjusted p = 2.45 × 10) as
–07
well as its child GO terms “carbohydrate metabolic process” (GO:0005975, FDR-adjusted p = 1.34 × 10) and
–13
“alpha amino acid metabolic process” (GO:1901605, FDR-adjusted p = 5.7 × 10), were enriched at the 50% ERH
condition (50% vs 100% ERH comparisons) (Fig. 4). The term “primary metabolic process” was also enriched
at the high 85% ERH (when compared to 100%). Additionally, as previously found secondary metabolic process
GO terms were enriched at 100% ERH (compared to 85%). Taken together, this indicates that while primary

p!{=stackrel{\\cdot}{0}}!.\ 14\

\\scriptstyle{p{=}0.014}

p!=!5.7!\\times!10^{-13})

(a)

Fig. 3. Expression heat map of (a) all differentially expressed genes and (b) genes associated with secondary
metabolism based on GO annotation (GO:0019748, GO:0044550). Color values are based on the TMMnormalized CPM expression value for each gene, where purple indicates high expression and red indicates low
expression. The dendrogram is only plotted for the samples based on Euclidean distances and complete linkage
method.

* * *

[www.nature.com/scientificreports/](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports/)

Growth Secondary metabolism Primary metabolism

**Fig. 4. Bubble plot of representative GO terms associated with Growth, Primary and Secondary metabolic**

processes enriched at each ERH condition. Growth, Primary and Secondary metabolic processes are represented by the color bars next to GO terms. Bubble sizes represent the number of upregulated genes in that GO category for a specific ERH comparison. Bubble color values are based on the significance (− log10(FDR- adjusted p)) of the GO term enrichment. Darker colors of bubbles represent higher significance of the GO term. All enriched GO terms for pairwise ERH comparisons are provided in Supplementary Table S5.

metabolism likely occurs at all moisture conditions, fungal growth and secondary metabolic processes occur in addition to primary metabolism when moisture conditions increase to elevated ERH conditions.

## Evidence of increased expression of genes associated with health effects at higher moisture

**conditions** The gene expression of allergens and toxins were investigated to examine possible effects on human health for future investigations to consider. We found that fungal allergen annotated contigs were differentially expressed based on differences in moisture conditions (Fig. 5, Table 1). Here, samples cluster together by ERH condition, with most fungal allergens upregulated at 85% or 100% ERH compared to 50% ERH (Fig. 5). Several genes that annotated for allergens from the common mold Aspergillus fumigatus such as Asp f 4 and the Alt a 7 allergen from Alternaria alternata were upregulated at higher moisture conditions (log2FC > 2, Supplementary Table S7). Except for the Mal f 1 gene, the allergen associated with the commensal yeast Malassezia, all fungal allergens including those associated with Aspergillus and Alternaria were upregulated at 85% and 100% ERH and not at the low 50% ERH (Fig. 5). Additionally, genes for several food allergens including olive pollen allergen Ole e 10 and rice allergen Ory s aA\_TI were present in the transcriptome but not examined further here. Several contigs associated with fungal toxins have upregulated expression (log2FC > 2) at the 100% moisture condition (Fig.  6, Table 2, Supplementary Table S8). GO terms related to aflatoxin biosynthetic processes (GO:1900177, GO:1900179) were upregulated at 100% ERH (compared to 85% ERH). Mycotoxin biosynthetic processes such as fumonisin and gliotoxin biosynthesis (GO:1900541 and GO:2001310) were expressed in the transcriptome (Table 2). There were also additional toxin annotations present in the transcriptome that were not differentially expressed.

# Discussion

The ISS is home to many different microbial species that interact in a dynamic relationship with astronauts, plants, and systems aboard the spacecraft27. This study uniquely studies fungal community gene expression in dust collected from the ISS using metatranscriptomics. Our results improve our knowledge of how microbial function may change under different moisture conditions in spacecraft to impact human health, spacecraft integrity, and planetary protection. Gene expression profiles of microbial communities in dust from the ISS were significantly partitioned by the three ERH conditions. When comparing differential expression patterns, samples consistently grouped according to chamber incubation moisture conditions compared to sampling bag. Additionally, genes associated with potentially negative human health effects are generally expressed at higher moisture conditions, which should be evaluated in future studies. We recognize that in the metatranscriptomes of mixed microbial communities such as in dust, the difference in gene expression with changes in ERH would be due to the combined effects of changes in gene expression of each gene in each microbial cell and the changes in community composition. Even though species composition does not seem to be as influenced by ERH as much as gene expression here, species composition likely influences overall gene expression24. Capturing such

**Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)

* * *

Fig. 5. Heatmap of differentially expressed genes with a fungal allergen annotation. Since multiple contigs
had the same allergen annotation, they are shown as numbered separately. Columns represent samples and
rows represent genes. Columns and rows are clustered by hierarchical clustering. Color values are based on the
mean-centered and log2 transformed TMM-normalized CPM expression counts value for each gene, where
purple indicates high expression and red indicates low expression. Gene annotations provided were extracted
from BLAST annotations and are provided along with log2FC values in Supplementary Table S7.

| Allergen | Organism | Type | Contig | Upregulation at ERH condition |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Asp f7 | Aspergillus fumigatus | Mold | contig 1 | Upregulated at 100% (vs 50%) and 85% (vs 50%) |
| contig 2 | Upregulated at 85% (vs 100%) and 85% (vs 50%) |  |  |  |
| Asp f4 | Aspergillus fumigatus | Mold | contig 1 | Upregulated at 85% (vs 50%) |
| contig 2 | Upregulated a 85% (vs 50%), 100% (vs 50%) and 85% (vs 100%) |  |  |  |
| contig 3 | Upregulated at 100% (vs 85%) |  |  |  |
| contig 4 | Upregulated at 100% (vs 50%) |  |  |  |
| Asp f15 | Aspergillus fumigatus | Mold | contig 1 | Upregulated at 100% (vs 50%) and 100% (vs 85%) |
| contig 2 | Upregulated at 85% (vs 50%) and 100% (vs 50%) |  |  |  |
| contig 3 | Upregulated at 85% (vs 50%) |  |  |  |
| Alt a7 | Alternaria alternata | Mold | contig 1 | Upregulated at 100% (vs 50%) |
| contig 2 | Upregulated at 100% (vs 50%) |  |  |  |
| Mal f1 | Malassezia furfur | Commensal yeast | contig 1 | Upregulated at 50% (vs 100%) |
| contig 2 | Upregulated at 50% (vs 100%) |  |  |  |
| contig 3 | Upregulated at 50% (vs 100%) |  |  |  |
| contig 4 | Upregulated at 50% (vs 100%) |  |  |  |
| Cla b7 | Cladosporium herbarum | Mold | contig 1 | Upregulated at 85% (vs 50%) |

combined system-level functional responses through metatranscriptomics can potentially be a more consistent
14,16
measure of microbial growth of a mixed and dynamic community such as in house dust.
NASA uses a robust monitoring program in efforts to eliminate or mitigate the negative effects of microbes in

measure of microbial growth of a mixed and dynamic community such as in house dust.
NASA uses a robust monitoring program in efforts to eliminate or mitigate the negative effects of microbes in
spacecraft7. There are acceptable microbial concentration limits in place for food, water, air, surfaces, and crew
28,29
members. Maximum concentrations of bacteria and fungi allowed in potable water, the air, or on surfaces
in the living and working areas on the ISS are internationally defined30. The standards are scored based on
the maximum total number of aerobic and heterotrophic viable cells of bacteria or fungi counted as colony
forming units (CFUs) on culture medium30. These standards are restricted to measuring only viable cells.
Dormant microbial communities can activate after moisture conditions reach a certain threshold10. This make it
critical to control the moisture levels in spacecraft, which are carefully controlled on the ISS by a combination of
31–33
ventilation and a temperature-humidity controller (THC). The elevated relative humidity conditions in this
study (85% and 100% ERH) are higher than typical conditions would be expected in spacecraft. Thus, the results
here mimic an unexpected ventilation system or other moisture event.

Tab l e 1. Fungal allergens expressed in the transcriptome and their differential upregulation.

* * *

Fig. 6. Heatmap of differentially expressed genes associated with aflatoxin related processes: regulation of
aflatoxin biosynthetic process and positive regulation of aflatoxin biosynthetic process. Columns represent
samples and rows represent gene annotations. Columns and rows are clustered using hierarchical clustering.
Color values are based on the mean-centered and log2 transformed TMM-normalized CPM expression counts
value for each gene, where purple indicates high expression and red indicates low expression. The differential
upregulation of fungal allergen contigs are also shown in Table 1. Gene annotations provided were extracted
from BLAST annotations and are provided along with log2FC values in Supplementary Table S8.

| GO ID | GO category | GO term | Expression |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| GO:1900177 | Biological process | Regulation of aflatoxin biosynthetic process | Upregulated at 100%(100% vs85%) |
| GO:1900179 | Biological process | Positive regulation of aflatoxin biosynthetic process | Upregulated at 100%(100% vs85%) |
| GO:0045461 | Biological process | Sterigmatocystin biosynthetic process | Expressed in transcriptome |
| GO:1900541 | Biological process | Fumonisin biosynthetic process | Expressed in transcriptome |
| GO:2001310 | Biological process | Gliotoxin biosynthetic process | Expressed in transcriptome |
| GO:0045122 | Biological process | Aflatoxin biosynthetic process | Expressed in transcriptome |
| GO:0043386 | Biological process | Mycotoxin biosynthetic process | Expressed in transcriptome |

Tab l e 2. Fungal toxin processes present in the transcriptome and differentially upregulated.

health effects associated with increased production of allergens and toxins.
Dust is an important source for human microbial exposure on Earth due to resuspension; however,
this resuspension does not occur in space the same way it does on Earth. The ISS environment in orbit is a
continuous state of microgravity, in which larger particles do not settle out of the air as they would on Earth, with

and quickly assessed allowing for crewmembers to rapidly act to prevent microbial growth from occurring24.
ERH was the more important indicator of gene expression activity compared to vacuum bag, which has
important implications for spacecraft monitoring systems. Over approximately a year during which samples
were collected for this study, microbial activity remained steady. A spacecraft monitoring system based on
microbial activity can establish a baseline level of activity among microbes present in dust. Fluctuations from this
baseline could be quickly identified indicating the potential for microbial growth. In a well-confined specialized
environment such as a spacecraft cabin, early detection of a microbial growth problem can prevent unwanted
exposures for crewmembers and protection of spacecraft materials.
32,33
Relative humidity on spacecraft such as the ISS is carefully controlled, and the results here highlight the [www.nature.com/scientificreports/](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports/)

particles > 100um remaining airborne36. Dust can also become liberated when crew members vacuum the debris from the air filters. The increase in airborne particles is short-lived as the filtration system quickly removes particles from the air. Vacuuming on the ISS occurs every week, and sometimes more frequently depending on the location. Particles of varying sizes on the ISS have different fungal and bacterial communities9 and astronauts may encounter dust particles during activities such as vacuuming or during hardware installation. Exposure to these microbial communities present in dust may impact astronaut health and is an important factor to consider when designing spacecraft life support systems. When moisture conditions were elevated, secondary metabolic activity occurred in addition to primary metabolic function in dust from the ISS. Secondary metabolic processes involve functions that go beyond processes that are required for growth and maintenance of cells and can involve the production of certain toxins or the utilization of unusual nutrients. Melanin metabolic process was upregulated at 100% ERH compared to 50% ERH. Melanin is a ubiquitous compound found in many microbes and its structure makes it a very stable molecule, resistant to a variety of destructive physicochemical processes such as radiation 37,38 . Spacecraft environments experience increased ionizing radiation levels, but levels observed on the ISS are not fungicidal 37–39 . Instead, melanized fungal species respond to radiation with enhanced growth and become radioresistant when exposed to high doses of ionizing radiation under experimental conditions40. The upregulation of genes associated with melanin metabolism that we observed in fungi at increased moisture conditions is not unexpected in our samples. One study found that the viability of melanized yeast post-flight was 50% higher than non-melanized yeasts, while no difference was observed for the Earth samples, suggesting that fungal melanin could potentially increase the lifespan of biological assets in space41. This process allows fungi to thrive provided humidity levels are sufficient and many microbes aboard the ISS have been found to be pigmented38. This suggests the usefulness of pigments such as melanin found in microbes under extreme conditions such as those on spacecraft.

**Limitations** This study has several limitations. It is unknown how transporting the dust back to Earth impacted our gene expression results. Additionally, elevated moisture conditions were simulated on Earth. Growth and microbial functional changes in response to moisture may be impacted in unknown ways when it occurs under spacecraft conditions. We did not have control samples representing indoor environments on Earth to state if gene expression changes were solely due to the effect of moisture or if there were additional effects associated with spacecraft specific conditions such as altered gravity, radiation or other unique spacecraft variables. Future work should also attempt to replicate spacecraft conditions on Earth to better study microbial activity in this specialized environment. Additionally, it is challenging to study fungal metatranscriptomics due to the lack of fully annotated fungal genomes42 as many contigs can only be identified as the closest homolog present in current databases. Genes are often present in multiple pathways and can be conserved across several taxa. For instance, we noted that for allergen annotated contigs, more than one contig had the same annotation, indicating the lack of accurate and complete fungal genome annotations in addition to potentially insufficient sequencing depth. We also noted that all enriched GO terms in our study may not have been associated with fungal genes. For instance, the term “secondary metabolite catabolic process” that is enriched at 85% ERH compared to 100%, contains no genes with a fungal annotation. In addition, some contigs were not annotated due to no sufficiently similar homologs existing in fungal genome databases. As fungal genomics advances, new insights may be mined from this data, deepening our understanding of how fungal gene expression varies with humidity.

# Conclusions

Metabolic activity of microbial communities found in dust on the ISS incubated under elevated relative humidity conditions is impacted more by moisture conditions. Increased potential for negative health effects from the production of allergens and toxins can be avoided by maintaining proper control of moisture on spacecraft, as is already done on the ISS. Understanding how microbes react to increased moisture conditions will help us develop more robust microbial monitoring standards for spacecraft and other specialized indoor environments. Future work will continue to consider specific microbial activity in dust from space environments, including those from the lunar and Martian surface vehicles and habitats. As humans extend their reach farther into space, we will continue to interact with microbes and moisture conditions which are inherent to life itself. Fully understanding microbial activity in these specialized environments will help us design spacecraft prioritizing human health, the integrity of the built environment, and planetary protection.

# Methods

## Dust collection and incubation chamber experiments

Dust was collected via vacuuming from the HEPA filter screens installed in the air circulation system located within the United States’ Segment aboard the ISS. During their regularly scheduled cleaning routine, crewmembers removed the debris from vents and HEPA filter screens throughout the ISS and it was collected in vacuum bags. This study analyzed dust from four different vacuum bags that were sealed and returned to Earth. These bags were returned over a period of 12 months in 2019 and 2020 on SpaceX Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) missions from the ISS. Bag one was returned via the SpaceX CRS-16 payload which splashed down January 13, 2019. Bag two returned via SpaceX CRS-17 on July 7, 2019. Bags three and four returned via SpaceX CRS-19 January 7, 2020. Dust was stored at room temperature under ambient conditions until ready for incubation. The dust was removed from the vacuum bag in a biosafety cabinet to prevent contamination and 25  mg portions of dust were incubated in sterile glass chambers at 25 °C and either 50%, 85%, or 100% ERH. Different concentrations of salt solutions (NaCl above water activity of 0.76 and MgCl2 below) were used to vary the

**Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)

* * *

[www.nature.com/scientificreports/](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports/)

relative humidity13. Water activity of salt solutions was verified with an Aqualab 4TE water activity meter (Decagon Devices, Pullman, WA, USA). Samples were incubated in the chambers for one week at each ERH condition, after which RNA was immediately extracted to prevent degradation. Based on the computational capabilities at the time, we estimated that we could process up to 20 samples in our bioinformatics pipeline. We included at least one sample from each ERH condition from each bag. We also included triplicate samples from all of Bag 1 and the 100% ERH condition samples of Bag 4. Samples sequenced from each vacuum bag and their incubated moisture condition are provided in Supplementary Table S1.

## RNA extraction and sequencing

RNA was extracted from the dust samples using the Qiagen RNeasy Powermicrobiome extraction kit procedure (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) modified to use 10 × the recommended beta-mercaptoethanol15 and 70% ethanol instead of PM4 during the PM3 and PM4 addition to account for RNA degradation per the extraction kit protocol. A Tapestation analysis was conducted on all the samples at The Genomics Shared Resource Center (The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center Shared Resources, Columbus, OH) using a Eukaryotic total High Sensitivity RNA ScreenTape system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) to check the quality and integrity of samples. RNA extracts were then sent to the Yale Center for Genomic Analysis (Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA) where they were reverse transcribed and then sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 (2 × 100 lane) with 25 million reads per sample. RNASeq library preparation was performed using the NEB Next Single Cell/Low Input RNA Library Prep Kit (New England Biolabs, USA) and the NEB Ultra II FS (New England Biolabs, USA) workflow for Illumina. The polyA selection protocol was used to select for eukaryotic mRNA. Sequence data was submitted to NASA’s GeneLab database under accession number GLDS-631 43 . After the library preparation step, one of the 85% ERH samples (Bag 1 Sample 2, incubated at 85% ERH, Supplementary Table S1) was excluded from further analysis based on the D1000 ScreenTape results (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) of library indexed cDNA. This sample had a lower concentration of indexed cDNA (4.5  ng/ul) compared to the concentrations for the other two 85% ERH sample replicates (15.0  ng/ul and 14.1 ng/ul, respectively), potentially caused due to variability during RNA extractions. This can translate to a lower number of quality reads after sequencing and could potentially confound the results of the differential gene expression analysis. Thus, a total of 19 samples were included in the final analysis.

## Initial processing and transcriptome assembly

Processing followed previously established protocols 15,44 . Quality assessment of sequences was determined using FastQC (v0.11.8) 45,46 . Initial processing involved the removal of erroneous k-mers created due to sequencing errors using the tool rCorrector (v1.0.4), a kmer-based error correction method designed for RNA-seq data47. rCorrector also identifies reads that contained errors but were deemed unfixable after correction. These unfixable reads were removed using the script FilterUncorrectablePEfastq.py from the TranscriptomeAssemblyTools package47. De novo metranscriptome assembly was carried out using the default Trinity (v2.12.0) settings run on the Ohio Super Computer (OSC) 48 . Poor quality reads and all contigs with a length less than 300 base pairs (bp) were removed using Trimmomatic within the Trinity pipeline49. One complete assembly was constructed from all sequenced samples. Contigs from the Trinity assembly were clustered using CD-HIT-EST (v4.8.1) which clustered contigs based on 80% sequence similarity 50,51 . CD-HIT-EST identifies representative sequences that meet the set similarity threshold, and these clusters represent all expressed contigs that make up the full transcriptome. A detailed table of parameters used in this pipeline are listed in Supplementary Table S2.

## Transcript quantification

The alignment-based quantification method RSEM (v1.3.3) was used to estimate transcript abundance in each sample52. The quality trimmed reads from each sample in which both the forward and reverse reads were retained after Trimmomatic were mapped back to the full transcriptome created using CD-HIT-EST. This was performed utilizing Bowtie2 (v2.3.4.3) 53 to determine transcript-level estimates of the count of RNA-Seq fragments that were derived from each transcript. A normalized measure of transcript expression that accounts for transcript length, the number of reads mapped to the transcript and the total number of reads that mapped to any transcript was also derived. Gene-level abundance estimates were used to construct a matrix of counts and a matrix of normalized expression values. Relationships between biological replicates were compared for both assemblies.

## Differential expression analysis

Differentially expressed genes and clustering of genes according to expression profiles was performed within the Trinity pipeline leveraging DESeq2 (v1.46.0) 54 . Pairwise comparisons among each ERH condition were performed. Genes that were most differentially expressed based on the most significant False Discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-values and fold-changes were extracted and clustered according to their patterns of differential expression across samples. Differentially expressed genes that had a FDR-adjusted p < 0.05 and log2FC ≥ 2, were examined for further analysis.

## Functional annotation and GO term enrichment analysis

Contigs from CD-HIT-EST were annotated using Trinotate (v3.2.2), a comprehensive annotation suite designed for automatic functional annotation of de novo assembled transcriptomes. Trinotate depends on inputs from both Trinity as well as TransDecoder (v.5.5.0). TransDecoder identifies candidate coding regions within transcript sequences utilizing a minimum length open reading frame (ORF) found in a transcript sequence.

**Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)

* * *

[www.nature.com/scientificreports/](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports/)

All ORFs were scanned for homology to known proteins utilizing a BLAST + search against Swiss-Prot58, and searching PFAM (HMMER v3.3.2) 59 to identify common protein domains. A Trinotate annotation report was generated utilizing an SQLite database60 and produced Gene Ontology (GO) 61 terms, KEGG ontology (KO) terms62. KEGG assignments for genes were visualized using the iPath3 tool63 as metabolic pathway maps. BLAST (BlastX or BlastP) annotations were used to identify fungal annotations of genes. Differentially expressed genes that had an FDR-adjusted p < 0.05 and log2FC ≥ 2, in each pairwise ERH comparison were used for GO term enrichment. GO term enrichment finds categories that are overrepresented amongst the differentially expressed genes within a pairwise ERH comparison64. Utilizing Goseq (v1.58.0) 64 within Trinity, each of the pairwise differential expression analysis results were analyzed for enriched GO categories for the genes that were upregulated for each pairwise ERH comparison. This meant that there were 6 gene lists that GO enrichment was performed on: genes upregulated at (1) 100% ERH upregulated vs 50%, 100% ERH vs 85% (2) 85% ERH vs 50% (3) 85% ERH vs 100% (4) 50% ERH vs 100% (5) 50% ERH vs 85%. We identified GO terms that were more prevalent under increased moisture conditions and GO terms potentially associated with fungal growth and secondary metabolic processes. In contrast to primary metabolism, which relates to the basic metabolic processes necessary for life, secondary metabolism constitutes the reactions and pathways that are not necessarily required for growth and maintenance of cells 15,65 . Secondary metabolic processes are those that include the production of certain harmful toxins, including mycotoxins and the utilization of unusual nutrients 65,66 .

## Statistical analysis

The statistical analysis software R (v.4.2.2) 67 was used to perform statistical testing. To compare gene expression profiles based on moisture condition, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed. Gene expression values in Counts Per Million (CPM) that were log2 transformed and row mean-centered standardization were used prior to analysis to limit bias towards highly expressed transcripts 54,68 . As PCA employs Euclidean distances of the data, the adonis2 function in R using the vegan package (v.2.6.4) 69 was used to determine statistical significance of ERH groupings (p < 0.05) using the Euclidean distance matrix of the gene expression data. The adonis2 test employed 10,000 permutations and we used the “p.adjust” function with the “BH” option to correct for False Discovery Rate (FDR) 70 to adjust for multiple comparisons. Significance was defined at FDR-adjusted _p < 0.05_ 71

. A 95% confidence ellipse using the stat\_ellipse function within the ggplot2 package (v.3.4.3)
72 was created to compare moisture conditions to each other. The Spearman rank correlation coefficient was calculated using the cor function using a Trinity generated R script for differentially expressed genes based on moisture condition. The Spearman rank correlation coefficient determines the strength and direction in the relationship between the data where a value of + 1 indicates the strongest positive correlation and − 1 indicating the highest negative correlation. Gene expression heatmaps were plotted using the ComplexHeatmap73 package in R, based on TMM- normalized (Trimmed Mean of M-values normalized) expression values to examine gene expression across samples74. Log2 transformed and row mean-centered standardization were performed prior to analysis to limit bias towards highly expressed transcripts 54,68 . Adobe Illustrator (v.28.3) ( [http://www.adobe.com](http://www.adobe.com/) /au/produc ts/ill ustr ator.html [https://inkscape.org/](https://inkscape.org/)) were used for finalizing figures. ) and Inkscape (v.1.3) (

# Data availability

The sequencing data that supports the findings of this study are available in NASA’s Open Science Data Reposi- tory (OSDR), also known as GeneLab, with the identifier [https://doi.org/10.26030/60zg-2n28](https://doi.org/10.26030/60zg-2n28) (GLDS-631) and at https:/ /osdr.nas a.gov/bio /repo/data/studies/OSD-701. R scripts used for analysis and visualizations, including the figures generated are available in GitHub ( [https://github.com/n-bsub/Gene-Expr\_ISS](https://github.com/n-bsub/Gene-Expr_ISS)).

Received: 5 June 2024; Accepted: 26 June 2025

# References

01. Coil, D. A. et al. Growth of 48 built environment bacterial isolates on board the International Space Station (ISS). PeerJ 4, e1842 (2016).

02. Be, N. A. et al. Whole metagenome profiles of particulates collected from the International Space Station. Microbiome 5, 81 (2017).

03. Reponen, T., Willeke, K., Ulevicius, V., Reponen, A. & Grinshpun, S. A. Effect of relative humidity on the aerodynamic diameter and respiratory deposition of fungal spores. Atmos. Environ. 30, 3967–3974 (1996).

04. Ott, C. M., Bruce, R. J. & Pierson, D. L. Microbial characterization of free floating condensate aboard the mir space station. Microb. _Ecol. 47, 133–136 (2004)._

05. Crucian, B. et al. Immune system dysregulation occurs during short duration spaceflight on board the space shuttle. J. Clin. _Immunol. 33, 456–465 (2013)._

06. Novikova, N. et al. Survey of environmental biocontamination on board the International Space Station. Res. Microbiol. 157, 5–12 (2006).

07. Lang, J. M. et al. A microbial survey of the International Space Station (ISS). PeerJ 5, e4029 (2017).

08. Alekhova, T. A. et al. Monitoring of microbial degraders in manned space stations. Appl. Biochem. Microbiol. 41, 382–389 (2005).

09. Haines, S. R., Bope, A., Horack, J. M., Meyer, M. E. & Dannemiller, K. C. Quantitative evaluation of bioaerosols in different particle size fractions in dust collected on the International Space Station (ISS). Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 103, 7767–7782 (2019).
    _Adv. Appl. Microbiol. 78, 75–120_

10. (2012). Rintala, H., Pitkäranta, M. & Täubel, M. Microbial communities associated with house dust.

11. Station surfaces. Sielaff, A. C. et al. Characterization of the total and viable bacterial and fungal communities associated with the International Space _Microbiome 7, 50. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-019-0666-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-019-0666-x) (2019)._

12. systematic review of risk factors. Sharpe, R. A., Bearman, N., Thornton, C. R., Husk, K. & Osborne, N. J. Indoor fungal diversity and asthma: A meta-analysis and _J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 135, 110–122 (2015)._ **Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)


* * *

[www.nature.com/scientificreports/](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports/)

13. and nonatopic children. Dannemiller, K. C., Gent, J. F., Leaderer, B. P. & Peccia, J. Indoor microbial communities: Influence on asthma severity in atopic _J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 138, 76–83 (2016)._

14. humidity using the “time-of-wetness” framework. Haines, S. R., Siegel, J. A. & Dannemiller, K. C. Modeling microbial growth in carpet dust exposed to diurnal variations in relative _Indoor Air 30, 978–992 (2020)._

15. Implications for human health. Hegarty, B., Dannemiller, K. C. & Peccia, J. Gene expression of indoor fungal communities under damp building conditions: _Indoor Air 28, 548–558 (2018)._

16. provides novel targets for potential indicators of mold growth in homes. Balasubrahmaniam, N., King, J. C., Hegarty, B. & Dannemiller, K. C. Moving beyond species: Fungal function in house dust _Microbiome 12, 231 (2024)._ _Build. Environ. 174, 106774_

17. (2020). Nastasi, N. et al. Morphology and quantification of fungal growth in residential dust and carpets.
    _Indoor_

18. _Air_ Dannemiller, K. C., Weschler, C. J. & Peccia, J. Fungal and bacterial growth in floor dust at elevated relative humidity levels. **27, 354–363 (2017).**

19. _Fundamentals of mold growth in indoor environments and strategies for healthy living. (Wageningen Academic, 2011)._

20. _Microorganisms in home and indoor work environments. (CRC Press, 2002)._ _Sci._

21. _Rep._ Nastasi, N. et al. Fungal diversity differences in the indoor dust microbiome from built environments on earth and in space. **14, 11858 (2024).**

22. quantified by mold-specific quantitative PCR. Vesper, S. J., Wong, W., Kuo, C. M. & Pierson, D. L. Mold species in dust from the International Space Station identified and _Res. Microbiol. 159, 432–435 (2008)._ _Microbes Environ._

23. **29** Yamaguchi, N. et al. Microbial monitoring of crewed habitats in space—Current status and future perspectives. , 250–260 (2014).

24. microbiome of dust collected from the International Space Station. Nastasi, N., Bope, A., Meyer, M. E., Horack, J. M. & Dannemiller, K. C. Predicting how varying moisture conditions impact the _Microbiome 12, 171 (2024)._ _FEMS_

25. _Yeast Res._ Calderone, R., Li, D. & Traven, A. System-level impact of mitochondria on fungal virulence: to metabolism and beyond. **15, fov027 (2015).** _Microbiol. Spectr. 5,_

26. 10–1128 (2017). Steinberg, G., Peñalva, M. A., Riquelme, M., Wösten, H. A. & Harris, S. D. Cell biology of hyphal growth.

27. _Proceedings of the International Astronautical Congress, IAC_ Nastasi, N. et al. Application of emerging innovations in microbiome science to space development and settlement systems. In (2022).

28. advanced life support systems like the international space station. van Tongeren, S. P., Raangs, G. C., Welling, G. W., Harmsen, H. J. M. & Krooneman, J. Microbial detection and monitoring in _Microgravity Sci. Technol. 18, 219–222._ [https://doi](https://doi/) .org/10.10 07/ BF02870413(9 (2006).
    _Microb. Ecol. 47,_

29. 150–158. Duc, M. T. L., Kern, R. & Venkateswaran, K. Microbial monitoring of spacecraft and associated environments. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-003-1012-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-003-1012-0) (2004).

30. _Planet. Space Sci._ Van Houdt, R., Mijnendonckx, K. & Leys, N. Microbial contamination monitoring and control during human space missions. **60, 115–120. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2011.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2011.09.001) (2012).**

31. technology evolution. In Carrasquillo, R. L., Wieland, P. O. & Reuter, J. L. International space station environmental control and life support system \*SAE Technical Paper Series (SAE International, 1996). [https://doi.org/10.4271/961475.\*](https://doi.org/10.4271/961475.*)

32. missions by supporting astronaut health, safety, and performance. Childress, S. D., Williams, T. C. & Francisco, D. R. NASA space flight human-system standard: Enabling human spaceflight _NPJ Microgravity 9, 31 (2023)._

33. and environmental health. NASA; 2022 Apr. Report No.: NASA-STD-3001. Preprint at National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA). NASA space flight human-system standard volume 2: Human factors, habitability, [https://www.nasa.go](https://www.nasa.go/) v/wp-cont ent/uploa ds /2020/10/2022-04-08\_nasa-s td-3001\_v ol\_2\_rev\_c \_fi nal.pdf .
    _Environmental Monitoring: A Comprehensive_

34. _Handbook_ Pierson, D. et al. Microbial monitoring of the International Space Station. In 1–27 (2012).

35. childhood asthma development. Dannemiller, K. C. et al. Next-generation DNA sequencing reveals that low fungal diversity in house dust is associated with _Indoor Air 24, 236–247 (2014)._ _Results of the Aerosol Sampling Experiment on the International Space Station. 48th International Conference on_

36. _Environmental Systems_ Meyer, M. E. (2018).
    _Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 23, 884–928 (2010)._

37. Revankar, S. G. & Sutton, D. A. Melanized fungi in human disease. _Curr. Opin._

38. _Microbiol._ Dadachova, E. & Casadevall, A. Ionizing radiation: How fungi cope, adapt, and exploit with the help of melanin. **11, 525–531 (2008).** _Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54,_

39. 2134–2135 (1988). Saleh, Y. G., Mayo, M. S. & Ahearn, D. G. Resistance of some common fungi to gamma irradiation.

40. presence and spatial arrangement. Dadachova, E. et al. The radioprotective properties of fungal melanin are a function of its chemical composition, stable radical _Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 21, 192–199 (2008)._ _Cryptococcus neoformans from spaceflight effects._

41. _Environ. Microbiol. Rep._ Cordero, R. J. B., Dragotakes, Q., Friello, P. J. & Casadevall, A. Melanin protects **14, 679–685 (2022).** _Fungal Ecol. 14, 133–137_

42. (2015). Kuske, C. R. et al. Prospects and challenges for fungal metatranscriptomics of complex communities.

43. _Nucleic Acids Res._ Berrios, D. C., Galazka, J., Grigorev, K., Gebre, S. & Costes, S. V. NASA GeneLab: Interfaces for the exploration of space omics data. **49, D1515–D1522 (2021).** _Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 21, 1268–_

44. 1279 (2019). Bope, A. et al. Degradation of phthalate esters in floor dust at elevated relative humidity.
    [http://www.bioinf](http://www.bioinf/) ormatics. babraham.ac.uk/proje

45. cAndrews. S. FastQC—A quality control tool for high throughput sequence data. ts/fast qc/. Babraham Bioinformatics (2010).
    _Nat. Biotechnol. 29,_

46. 644–652 (2011). Grabherr, M. G. et al. Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a reference genome.

47. [https://githu](https://githu/) b.com/harvardinformatics/tra nscriptom eassemblytools. [https://github.com/harvardinformatics/TranscriptomeAsse](https://github.com/harvardinformatics/TranscriptomeAsse) mb lyTools/blob/mast er/Filter Uncorrect abledPEfastq.py.

48. analysis. Haas, B. J. et al. De novo transcript sequence reconstruction from RNA-seq using the Trinity platform for reference generation and _Nat. Protoc. 8, 1494–1512 (2013)._ _Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120_

49. (2014). Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data.
    _Bioinformatics_

50. **22** Li, W. & Godzik, A. Cd-hit: A fast program for clustering and comparing large sets of protein or nucleotide sequences. , 1658–1659 (2006).
    _Bioinformatics 28,_

51. 3150–3152 (2012). Fu, L., Niu, B., Zhu, Z., Wu, S. & Li, W. CD-HIT: Accelerated for clustering the next-generation sequencing data.
    _BMC_

52. _Bioinform._ Li, B. & Dewey, C. N. RSEM: Accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a reference genome. **12, 323 (2011).** _Nat. Methods 9, 357–359 (2012)._

53. Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. _Genome_

54. _Biol._ Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. **15, 550 (2014).** **Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)


* * *

[www.nature.com/scientificreports/](http://www.nature.com/scientificreports/)

_Cell Rep. 18,_

55. 762–776 (2017). Bryant, D. M. et al. A tissue-mapped axolotl de novo transcriptome enables identification of limb regeneration factors.
    [https://github.com/transdecoder/transdecoder](https://github.com/transdecoder/transdecoder) (2017).

56. Haas, B. & Papanicolaou, A. TransDecoder. _J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403–410 (1990)._

57. Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E. W. & Lipman, D. J. Basic local alignment search tool. _Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D480–D489 (2021)._

58. Bateman, A. et al. UniProt: The universal protein knowledgebase in 2021. _Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D412–D419 (2021)._

59. Mistry, J. et al. Pfam: The protein families database in 2021. _Nat. Genet. 25, 25–29 (2000)._

60. Ashburner, M. et al. Gene ontology: Tool for the unification of biology. _Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D1049–D1056 (2015)._

61. Gene Ontology Consortium. Gene ontology consortium: Going forward. _Protein Sci. 29, 28–35 (2020)._

62. Kanehisa, M. & Sato, Y. KEGG mapper for inferring cellular functions from protein sequences. _Nucleic Acids Res. 46, W510–W513 (2018)._

63. Darzi, Y., Letunic, I., Bork, P. & Yamada, T. iPath3.0: Interactive pathways explorer v3.

64. _Genome Biol._ Young, M. D., Wakefield, M. J., Smyth, G. K. & Oshlack, A. Gene ontology analysis for RNA-seq: Accounting for selection bias. **11, R14 (2010).** _Bioinformatics 25, 288–289 (2009)._

65. Carbon, S. et al. AmiGO: Online access to ontology and annotation data. _Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3,_

66. 937–947 (2005). Keller, N. P., Turner, G. & Bennett, J. W. Fungal secondary metabolism—From biochemistry to genomics.
    [https://www.R-project.org/](https://www.r-project.org/) (2022).

67. R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. _Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 303–304 (2008)._

68. Ringnér, M. What is principal component analysis?. _J. Veg. Sci. 14, 927–930 (2003)._

69. Dixon, P. VEGAN, a package of R functions for community ecology. _J. R. Stat._

70. _Soc._ Benjamini, Y. & Hochberg, Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. **57, 289–300 (1995).**

71. of false discovery rates: A unified approach. Storey, J. D., Taylor, J. E. & Siegmund, D. Strong control, conservative point estimation and simultaneous conservative consistency _J. R. Stat. Soc. Series B Stat. Methodol. 66, 187–205 (2004)._

72. Wickham, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis (Springer Nature, 2016).

73. _Bioinformatics_ Gu, Z., Eils, R. & Schlesner, M. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns and correlations in multidimensional genomic data. **32, 2847–2849 (2016).** _Genome Biol._

74. **11** Robinson, M. D. & Oshlack, A. A scaling normalization method for differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data. , R25 (2010).


# Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Dr. Mark Ott, staff at the NASA Microbiology Laboratory, and staff at the Toxi- cology and Environmental Chemistry (TEC) for help in obtaining dust from the International Space Station. The authors would like to thank Dr. Ashleigh Bope for assistance with writing the initial draft and implementing the bioinformatics pipeline. The authors would also like to acknowledge National Aeronautics and Space Adminis- tration (NASA) grant 80NSSC19K0429 and National Science Foundation (NSF) grant 1942501 to support the work. The authors would also like to thank the Ohio Supercomputer Center for computational time to complete the analysis.

# Author contributions

KCD conceived the idea and oversaw the project. KCD, MEM, and JMH obtained funding. NN collected and processed the samples. NB performed the bioinformatics, data analysis and visualizations on the RNA data. BH helped develop the RNA data processing pipeline. BH and SRH consulted on the bioinformatics analysis. NB, SRH and KCD wrote the initial version of the manuscript. NN, MEM and JMH reviewed and edited the final draft. All authors reviewed, edited, and approved the final version of the manuscript.

# Declarations

# Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

# Additional information

\*\*Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at [https://do\*\*](https://do**/) i.org/1

0.1 038/s41598 -025-09534 -6.

## Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.C.D.

## Reprints and permissions information is available at [www.nature.com/reprints](http://www.nature.com/reprints).

## Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and

institutional affiliations.

## Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives

4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http: //creative commo ns.or g/licenses /by-nc-nd/4.0/.

## © The Author(s) 2025

**Scientific Reports \| (2025) 15:28366** \| [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09534-6)