A Nature Portfolio journal

[https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08514-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08514-w)

Inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 at acidic pH is
driven by partial unfolding of spike

Check for updates

1 2,3 5
Irina Glas, Liv Zimmermann, Beiping Luo4, Marie O. Pohl1, Antoni G. Wrobel, Aline Schaub6,
1
Liviana K. Klein4, Shannon C. David6, Elisabeth Gaggioli1, Nir Bluvshtein4, Michael Huber,
7,8 4 6 2,3
Athanasios Nenes, Ulrich K. Krieger, Thomas Peter4, Tamar Kohn, Petr Chlanda &
1
Silke Stertz

SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19, is predominantly transmitted by respiratory aerosol
and contaminated surfaces. Recent studies demonstrated that aerosols can become acidic, and
acidification has been proposed as decontamination method. Here, we investigate how SARS-CoV-2
1234567890():,;1234567890():,;reacts to acidic pH and by which mechanism the virus is inactivated. We show that a pH below 3 is
required to inactivate SARS-CoV-2 in a period of seconds to minutes. While we measured a 1000 to
10,000-fold drop in infectivity, virion structure remained intact under these conditions. Using superresolution microscopy, we found that the attachment of virions to target cells is abrogated after acidic
treatment, revealing spike protein (S) as the major inactivation target. Limited proteolysis of S
combined with testing spike-specific antibodies for binding under low pH conditions revealed that
exposure of SARS-CoV-2 to pH below 3 results in partial unfolding of S, thereby preventing binding of
virions to target cells.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged
in 2019 and has since caused a pandemic with over 7 million deaths
worldwide according to the WHO1. SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the family of
Coronaviridae, which are enveloped viruses with a positive sense RNA
genome. The spike glycoprotein (S) is the main determinant facilitating viral
entry. S is comprised of two subunits (S1 and S2) separated by a furin
cleavage site that is either cleaved during viral egress by furin or furin-like
proteases, during attachment to a host cell by transmembrane serine pro-
2–7
tease 2 (TMPRSS2) or during endosomal traffickingbyCathepsinL.The
S1 subunit includes the N-terminal domain (NTD) as well as the receptor
binding domain (RBD), responsible for binding to the cellular receptor
8,9
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).Afterattachment,the
10,11
S1 subunit dissociates together with ACE2 from S2.Subsequently,S2is
cleaved at the S2’ site by TMPRSS2 (fusion at the plasma membrane) or
4,12
CathepsinL(fusionintheendosome). This enables conformational
changes that expose the fusion peptide and eventually lead to fusion,
releasing the genome into the cytosol4. However, there is also evidence that
S2’ cleavage is not necessarily required for the transition of S2 into the

postfusion conformation after ACE2 binding12. SARS-CoV-2 has four
transmission modes: Direct contact, indirect contact through contaminated
fomites, direct deposition of larger infectious respiratory particles (IRPs),
13,14
and airborne transmission through inhalation of small IRPs. Particularly
the latter has been a challenging obstacle for transmission route tracking and
disease containment. Therefore, in order to mitigate SARS-CoV-2 infection
waves, other endemic respiratory viruses, as well as future zoonotic events, it
is crucial to understand airborne transmission and develop new measures to
control spread15.

1 2
Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Schaller Research Group, Department for Infectious Diseases, Virology, Heidelberg
3
University, Heidelberg, Germany. BioQuant - Research Center for Quantitative Analysis of Molecular and Cellular Systems, Heidelberg University,
4 5
Heidelberg, Germany. Institute for Atmospheric and Climate Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford,
6
Oxford, UK. Environmental Chemistry Laboratory, School of Architecture, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne,
7
Lausanne, Switzerland. Laboratory of Atmospheric Processes and their Impacts, School of Architecture, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Swiss Federal
8
Institute of Technology in Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Institute of Chemical Engineering Sciences, Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas,
Patras, Greece. e-mail: [stertz.silke@virology.uzh.ch](mailto:stertz.silke@virology.uzh.ch) pH in respiratory aerosols, which remains uncertain and is a topic of
ongoing research. Nevertheless, it has been shown that pH changes are
variable and depend on several factors including aerosol matrix, time after
emission from the respiratory tract, particle size, and air composition22.
Microphysical model calculations and aerosol particle experiments suggest
IRPs transition through an alkaline phase due to rapid loss of bicarbonate
but then, depending on air composition and particle size, readily equilibrate
22–25
at acidic pH due to uptake of ambient acids. Model calculations also
indicate that due to diffusive limitations, the time scale to transition to acidic
pH decreases with particle size23. For example, it was predicted that the
acidity of IRPs with a radius of 1 μm would reach pH 4 within about 2 min
after exhalation in typical indoor air, while it takes hours to reach the same
22,23
pH in particles larger than 20 μm. Viral RNA, infectious virus and finally
transmission in animal models has been detected for various respiratory
particle size fractions, however, a majority of viral RNA was found in smaller
26–29
particles. Additionally, smaller IRPs remain airborne for longer, travel
further and are captured by surgical masks to a lesser extent than larger
particles26.
Factors influencing IRP properties, such as IRP matrix, time after

particles26.
Factors influencing IRP properties, such as IRP matrix, time after
exhalation, and particle size, are not easy to influence, but gas phase compositions can be varied. The variation of relative humidity (RH) is the most
prominent example of a gas phase property influencing stability of aero-
30,31
solized viruses. Recently, modifying air composition to shift aerosol pH
(in either direction) has been proposed as a potential mechanism to mitigate
15,23,24
transmission risk. However, the sensitivity to acidic or alkaline pH
differs between viruses. For example, influenza A viruses (IAVs) are readily
inactivated at pH below 5.5–6, while coronaviruses are more stable at acidic
pH: in a previous study, we observed inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 only at
pH below 3. Interestingly, human coronavirus 229E (HCoV-229E)
23
remained stable for hours even at pH 2. These virus-specific differences
suggest distinct inactivation mechanisms. While the inactivation mechanism of IAV at low pH is understood to be caused by the hemagglutinin
glycoprotein (HA) irreversibly switching to its post-fusion conformation32,
the inactivation mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 at acidic pH has been
unknown. To date, research concerning S structure has focused on pH
33,34
values down to 4, representing physiological pH in endosomal compartments of cells, at which SARS-CoV-2 remains infectious23.Inthisstudy,
we investigate the inactivation mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 at pH that is
lower than intracellular values but can be encountered by viruses in small
IRPs when certain gas phase composition requirements are met. We show
that partial unfolding of S is the primary driver of SARS-CoV-2 inactivation
at acidic pH disrupting the viral life cycle at the attachment stage. However,
HCoV-229E S is more stable and virions remain infectious for hours at pH
2.0. These findings contribute to our understanding of coronavirus stability
in IRPs.

Results
Acidic pH below 3 leads to fast inactivation of SARS-CoV-2, but

Results
Acidic pH below 3 leads to fast inactivation of SARS-CoV-2, but
not HCoV-229E
Respiratory aerosol pH is a crucial factor concerning aerosol stability of

acidified air, we exposed the early SARS-CoV-2 isolate BetaCoV/Ger-
36
many/BavPat1/2020 (BavPat1) and HCoV-229E encoding a Renilla
37
luciferase reporter (HCoV-229E-Ren) to pH below 3 in bulk solution. In
brief, virus samples were exposed to an acidic environment, incubated at
RT for various periods, and then neutralized as depicted in Fig. 1A.
Neutralization is an essential step in our setup, since IRPs also return to
neutral pH when they are re-inhaled by a susceptible person. We found
that SARS-CoV-2 is stable at pH 7.1, while substantial inactivation was
observed at pH 2.8, with more than a 1000-fold drop in titer after 10 min of
exposure. At pH 2.2, we observed fast inactivation with a nearly complete
inactivation already after 10 s, as shown in Fig. 1B. We then performed
single-cycle infection experiments with pH-treated BavPat1 samples on
Vero-E6 cells overexpressing ACE2 and TMPRSS2 (VAT cells), and tested
for the production of nucleocapsid (N) protein by immunofluorescent
(IF) staining 7 h post-infection (hpi). In line with the plaque assay titrations, no viral protein production was observed when cells were infected
with SARS-CoV-2 treated at either pH 2.8 for 10 min or pH 2.2 for 10 s
(Fig. 1C), suggesting that early stages of the infection were abrogated.
Remarkably, HCoV-229E-Ren showed high stability at acidic pH with no
detectable inactivation after 1 h of exposure to pH 2.0 as shown in Fig. 1D.
The Renilla gene did not influence these results, as we observed the same
results with the HCoV-229E wild type strain (Fig. S1C). To test if this
inactivation kinetic of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 is representative of currently
circulating variants, we studied the JN.1 Omicron isolate SARS-CoV-2/
human/Switzerland/ZH-UZH-IMV15/2024 (JN.1). The stability of JN.1
at pH 7.1 and 2.1 was comparable to BavPat1 (Fig. S1D). However, we
observed a faster inactivation of JN.1 at pH 2.7 with an ~100-fold higher
drop in infectivity as compared to BavPat1 after 1 min of exposure
(Fig. S1E). Nevertheless, both strains are stable at pH 4.3 over the measured time course, which is representative of the predicted equilibration
pH of IRPs in typical indoor air, and are therefore considerably more
stable than IAV (Fig. S1F). Although inactivation times between SARS-
CoV-2 variants differ at pH 2.7, overall, we conclude that BavPat1 is a
suitable SARS-CoV-2 representative. As virus stock preparation and titer
varied between our SARS-CoV-2 and HCoV-229E samples, we tested the
impact of stock concentration methods on pH stability, as well as the
impact of virus titer during the pH exposure reaction. We did not observe
any change in HCoV-229E-Ren stability within 10 min exposure to pH
2.0 when the input titer was 10-fold lower or when stocks concentrated by
ultracentrifugation or Amicon filtration were tested (Fig. S1G,H). Even
after 1 h of exposure to pH 2.0 we could not observe a difference between
methods used to concentrate HCoV-229E-Ren virus stocks or between
different reaction titers used (Fig. S1I,J). These data highlight that HCoV-
229E is indeed substantially more pH stable than SARS-CoV-2.

Viral membrane integrity of SARS-CoV-2 is preserved after acid
treatment
First, we used cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET) to explore if there are

* * *

A

C

B

Fig. 1 \| SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1, but not HCoV-229E-Ren, is efficiently inactivated
at a pH of 2.2. A Scheme showing the sample preparation in bulk solutions. Virus is
spiked into an acidic environment and incubated at RT. At each time point, a sample
is taken from the reaction and neutralized by a 1:100 dilution in PBSi (additionally
buffered at pH 7). Created in BioRender. Glas, I. (2025) [https://BioRender.com/](https://biorender.com/)
o9x4cqe. B Inactivation curves in PFU/ml of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 over time at pH
7.1, 2.8, and 2.2 determined by plaque assay from three independent experiments
done in duplicates. Samples were generated as shown in (A). Dotted lines indicate
titer measured in the untreated control and the limit of detection (LoD). C IF images

D

To investigate whether exposure to acidic pH causes major damages to
virion structure, we utilized an RNase digestion assay as described by David
32
et al., in which virions are exposed to RNases, testing their capacity to
protect the genome. To validate our assay set-up, we first tested viral RNA
levels after RNase treatment of free viral RNA, SARS-CoV-2 virus samples
as well as ethanol-treated SARS-CoV-2 virus. Free RNA was efficiently
digested with an average reduction around 10,000-fold, while SARS-CoV-2
stock samples had no detectable losses in genomic copy (GC) numbers
(Fig. 2F). If SARS-CoV-2 stock samples were treated with 80% ethanol
disrupting the membrane, RNases could access the viral genome, and the
amount of extracted RNA was reduced by an average of around 2500-fold
(Fig. 2F). When applying the assay to low pH-treated samples of SARS-
CoV-2 we did not observe striking changes in the RNA levels (Figs. 2Gand
S2A). Infectious titer and GC reduction did not correlate, with observed
maximal reductions of 100,000-fold in PFU and 14-fold in GC (Fig. 2H).
Therefore, we conclude that SARS-CoV-2 inactivation by low pH in Fig. 1B,
C is not caused by envelope disruption. To assess the effect of acidic pH on
virion structure, we performed cryo-ET on SARS-CoV-2 and HCoV-229E

samples after treatment at neutral or acidic pH with subsequent neutralization and UV-inactivation. To obtain higher virus concentrations for
cryo-ET, we increased the amount of concentrated SARS-CoV-2 stock
added into the pH reaction, hence also increasing protein concentrations in
the inactivation reaction. Besides an increased buffering capacity impeding
acidification, we observed a slower inactivation kinetic (Fig. S2B), most
23,31,38
likely caused by the elevated protein content exerting protective effects.
We therefore increased the incubation time to a period of 1 h, at which
almost complete inactivation was achieved,similartopH2.8after10minor
pH2.2after10sinalow-proteincontext(Fig.1B). We additionally performed the RNase digestion assay on these samples, shown in Fig. 2I, and
again found no relation between PFU reduction and GC reduction after
RNase treatment (Fig. S2C).
Cryo-ET revealed that SARS-CoV-2 virions treated at pH 2.8 have an

* * *

A

D

F

G

J

Fig. 2 \| Virion characterization and integrity of pH treated SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1
and HCoV-229E-Ren samples. A Slices of tomograms showing virions from cell
culture supernatants of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 and HCoV-229E-Ren infected cells.
The scale bar corresponds to 50 nm. Quantification of untreated SARS-CoV-2
BavPat1 and HCoV-229E-Ren tomograms from n = 25 and n = 32 virions, respectively: Virion diameter in nm (B), number of S per virion (C), sphericity (D), and
percentage of S in the post-fusion conformation (E). Tomograms were derived from
a single SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 or HCoV-229E-Ren sample. Statistical tests were
performed using the unpaired, nonparametric Mann–Whitney test (two-tailed) in
GraphPad Prism. Data was considered non-significant (ns) if p values were 0.05 or
above and significant for p values below 0.05 (p < 0.05 ( _), p < 0.005 ( **), p < 0.0005**_
_**(**_)). F Control panel introducing the RNA digestion assay. Intact SARS-CoV-2
BavPat1 virions are able to protect their genetic material from nucleases, while free or
accessible RNA is digested during RNase treatment. Included are a free RNA control
(RNA), a virus stock sample (stock) and a virus stock sample lysed with 80% ethanol
(EtOH). GC numbers were determined by qPCR on the E segment and the GC loss

K

\\mathrm{l o g}\_{10}

\\log\_{10}

calculated and log10 transformed. Shown are average values from n = 3 independent
experiments. G Calculated log10 loss of GC after RNA digestion normalized to the
pH 7.1 10 s sample. SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 samples were generated as shown in
Fig. 1A, subsequently exposed to RNases, and GC numbers were determined by
qPCR. Shown are average values from n = 4 replicates derived from three independent experiments. H Data in (G) correlated with the corresponding log10 of the
loss in PFU/ml of each sample calculated from the data shown in Fig. 1B. Linear
regression was performed using GraphPad Prism (n = 36). The coefficient of
determination (R²) is 0.31. The slope is 0.11 (95% CI: \[0.05, 0.17\]), with a p value of
0.0004. Dotted line represents a perfect correlation. I As described in (G), log10 loss
in GC numbers and PFU were calculated for SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 samples with
increased reaction titer and protein content during the pH inactivation at pH 2.8.
Data was derived from n = 3 independent replicates. Slices of tomograms showing
SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 virions (J) or HCoV-229E-Ren virions (K) treated at pH 7.1,
pH 2.8, or pH 2.0. The scale bar corresponds to 50 nm. In (B–G, I) data are means
with the error bars representing the standard deviation (SD).

SARS-CoV-2 virions inactivated by acidic pH lack binding ability
to target cells
After confirming that virion membrane integrity is preserved, we examined

(left(\\mathrm{R}^{2}\\right)

* * *

Fig. 3 \| SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 virions lose cell
binding ability after low pH treatment. VAT cells
were incubated with neutralized SARS-CoV-2
BavPat1 samples (treated with pH 7.1 or pH 2.8
beforehand) for 1.5 h on ice. Subsequently,
VAT cells with bound virus were fixed, permeabilized, stained for N (cyan) and with CellBrite 680, a
membrane dye (brown), and imaged by super
resolution microscopy. Shown are maximal
z-projections of representative cells as well as
extended y-z-sections and x-z sections as indicated
with yellow lines. The red boxes show magnified
images of the x-z-section. Scale bars correspond to
10 μm. Four to eight z-stacks were acquired per
condition in each of three independent experiments.

pH 7.1

reaction proceed for 1 h to achieve almost complete inactivation at pH 2.8
(Fig. S2B). Neutralized SARS-CoV-2 samples treated with pH 7.1 or pH 2.8
were added to VAT cells and incubated for 1.5 h on ice to allow for virus
attachment but prevent internalization39. We then imaged attached SARS-
CoV-2 virions at the cell membrane by super-resolution microscopy using a
membrane staining and an N antibody to detect SARS-CoV-2 virions. We
found a pronounced loss of virions located at the plasma membrane of cells
incubated with samples treated at acidic pH compared to samples treated at
neutral pH (Fig. 3). This indicates that binding of SARS-CoV-2 virions to
target cells was almost completely absent due to the inactivation at acidic
pH. To further assess the link between virus inactivation and inability to
attach to target cells, we performed the assay with samples treated at pH 7.1
or pH 2.8 for just 10 s. Both are conditions where no inactivation had been
detected (Fig. S2B). In addition, we included an untreated SARS-CoV-2 and
a mock control. As expected, no bound virions were observed in the mock
control, while the untreated sample and the samples treated for 10 s showed
numerous SARS-CoV-2 virions bound to the cell surface independent of pH
treatment (Fig. S3A–D). Of note, we detected similar GC reductions in our
RNase digestion assay for the corresponding samples treated at pH 2.8 for
either 10 s or 1 h shown in Fig. 2I. Samples treated at pH 2.8 for 10 s showed
an average GC reduction of 9.8-fold, slightly higher than the 7.4-fold
observed for samples treated at pH 2.8 for 1 h (Fig. 2I), emphasizing that
disrupted virion membrane integrity is not responsible for the observed
reductioninboundvirionsinFig.3.

changes in S
After having mapped the defect of low pH inactivated SARS-CoV-2 to
attachment, we aimed to study the conformational integrity of S in
response to acidic pH treatment. We utilized limited proteolysis (LiP) as
an approach to track conformational changes in recombinant S trimers
treated at pH 2.0 in relation to the pH 7.0 control. In brief, recombinant S
was treated with neutral or acidic pH, neutralized, concentrated and then
exposed to proteinase K for 5 min. Subsequently, samples were denatured
and fully digested with trypsin to allow bottom-up liquid chromatography
coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. We then looked for
peptide abundance changes of pH 2.0 treated S compared to pH 7.0 treated
S and identified six semi-tryptic peptides with significant changes
(Fig. 4A). Four of those surpassed the log2 fold change threshold of 1.
These four peptides belong to three different regions in the S2 domain
(Fig. 4B). We noticed that the proteinase K cleavage sites of these peptides
are buried inside the S trimer (Fig. 4B). This suggests inaccessibility of
these cleavage sites in the native conformation (at pH 7.0) and in consequence increased proteinase K exposure due to conformational changes
or trimer dissociation caused by the pH 2.0 treatment. The two remaining
peptides that did not cross our log2 fold change threshold but reached
significance are found in the NTD of the S1 subunit (Fig. 4B) and in the
flexible region at the C-terminus of the S2 subunit, suggesting that other

regions might be affected as well. A list of all identified peptides can be
found in Supplementary Data 1.
The S coverage in the LiP experiment was ~35% with most peptides

found in Supplementary Data 1.
The S coverage in the LiP experiment was ~35% with most peptides
located in the S2 region raising questions about undetected changes in the S1
subunit, and especially the RBD, that could explain the disruption in
attachment (Fig. 3). Furthermore, the experiment was done with a stabilized
trimer including furin cleavage site mutationsaswellasmutationsfavoring
the pre-fusion conformation of S, which could potentially dampen pH effects.
We therefore utilized various S-specific antibodies to study S conformation
on virions. In brief, virions were bound to cover slips and exposed to different
pH values for 1 min before neutralization, fixation, and IF staining. We tested
two different neutralizing RBD antibodies recognizing SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1
S in a native trimeric conformation, as found on virions in IF and one RBD
antibody recognizing the denatured, linear form of S, as found in western
blots (WB). Further, we used two NTD antibodies and one S2 antibody with
a preference for the denatured state of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 S. As a control
we used an N antibody that binds to SARS-CoV-2 independent of pH
treatment (Fig. S4A–C). All antibodies were tested in IF and WB to confirm
binding preferences (Figs. 5A–C, S4D, E, and S5). Antibodies detecting S in
WB were considered as antibodies with a preference for linear epitopes. We
observed decreased binding of both neutralizing RBD antibodies to virions
treated at pH 2.0 (Figs. 5A and S4D). However, all antibodies with a preference for the denatured form of S, including the RBD antibody, showed an
increased signal in IF indicating better linear epitope accessibility due to the
pH 2.0 treatment (Figs. 5A–C and S4E). We quantified the signal intensities
by calculating the total intensity per image of all pixels positive for the N
signal. For each image, the total intensityofthedifferentSantibodieswas
normalized to the corresponding N signal intensity. Concerning neutralizing
RBD antibodies, the RBD-to-N signal ratio declined with decreasing pH, with
the strongest reduction observed after pH 2.0 treatment (Figs. 5DandS4F).
To assess signal co-localization independently of signal strength, we additionally calculated the Manders correlation coefficient (M1) between the
RBD signal and the N signal. The Manders coefficient reflects the fraction of
the N signal overlapping with any detectable RBD signal, regardless of
intensity correlation. In line with the intensity reduction, Manders' correlation values for neutralizing RBD antibodies also decreased at lower pH,
indicating a partial loss of detectable RBD signal on virions (Figs. 5Eand
S4G). In contrast, the S2 antibody showed high Manders correlations
(averaging 0.81) at pH 7.0 increasing to 0.96 in samples treated at pH 2.0
(Fig. 5G). Similarly, the RBD antibody #63847 with a binding preference to
denatured S showed an increase in both intensity ratio and Manders correlation (Fig. 5H, I). The most pronounced effect was observed for the NTD
antibody MA5-36247: While the signal was almost undetectable at pH 7.0,
we revealed a strong increase in signal for SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 virions
treated at pH 2.0 with a fold change of ~12 in the intensity ratio and 3 in the
Manders correlation (Fig. 5J, K). A similar effect was observed for the second
NTD antibody #56996 (Fig. S4H, I). The raw intensity sums of the acquired
images are provided in Fig. S4A–C, J, K.

* * *

A

B

Fig. 4 \| Peptide candidates determined by LiP LC-MS after pH treatment of
recombinant S. A Volcano plot showing the Log2 fold change of all S peptides
derived from the pH 2.0 sample compared to the pH 7.0 sample. The negative log10p
values are shown on the Y-axis. Peptides with a higher negative log10 p value than
2.439 (corresponding to a Q value of 0.05) were considered significant. Dotted lines
indicate log2 fold changes of −1 and 1 as well as the significance threshold. Peptides
with significant changes above a log2 fold change of 1 were colored orange, while
peptides with significant changes below 1 were colored blue. Data was derived from
n = 4 technical replicates per condition. Raw data are available via ProteomeXchange

\\log\_{10},\\uprho

\\log\_{10},\\uprho

with identifier PXD064612. B S trimer structure (PDB ID: 6ZGG) from different
angles showing the location of significant peptides. The upper row shows the surface
view, while the lower row shows the cartoon view. Peptides with significant changes
were visualized on a single monomer (light gray). Significant peptides above a log2
fold change of 1 were colored orange, while peptides with significant changes below 1
were colored blue. Proteinase K cleavage sites were colored red for each peptide. Of
note, the peptide “SVVNIQK” is in an unresolved region of S2 and therefore not
depicted.

To assess if the results obtained for SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 are reflective of
other variants we repeated the antibody assay shown in Fig. 5 with the
SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant JN.1. For this purpose, we used a

The observed decrease in signal from the neutralizing RBD antibodies
detected by IF could be explained by two potential mechanisms: Either
acidic pH causes shedding of the S1 subunit, or the low pH leads to conformational changes reducing the accessibility or disruption of the RBD.
Both mechanisms could potentially result in decreased attachment of SARS-
CoV-2 BavPat1 to the host cell after treatment with acidic pH (Fig. 3). To
address this, we determined the ratio of cleaved S2 to uncleaved S0 in our
virus preparations by WB and found that all SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 preparations contained a mix of uncleaved and cleaved S with S2/S0 ratios
ranging between 1.0 and 2.2 (Fig. 5L, M). Considering that S1 shedding
could only occur for S in its cleaved form together with the increased signal
of RBD and NTD antibodies (preferring linear epitopes) to pH 2.0 treated
SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 virions detected by IF (Figs. 5 and S4), we conclude
that the reduction in RBD signal is unlikely caused by S1 shedding. In
Figs. 5N and S4L we visualized the epitopes of all antibodies used, reported
the structural preference for epitopes (linear or native) as determined by WB
and IF, and summarized if acidic pH caused a signal increase or decrease in
our IF assay. Overall, all antibodies binding linear epitopes showed a signal
increase in our IF assay when virions had encountered acidic pH, while
antibodies binding natively folded S showed a signal decrease. This is
consistent with S unfolding events and denaturation disrupting native
epitopes, while exposing linear epitopes. Most strikingly, we were able to
detect unfolding in the RBD domain responsible for virion attachment,
which was not detectable with the LiP approach.

neutralizing RBD antibody specific to Omicron variants with a preference
fornativeepitopesaswellastheSARS-CoV-2 S2 antibody with a preference
for linear epitopes. Again, the binding preference of these antibodies was
confirmed beforehand in IF and WB (Figs. S6A, B and S7A). Importantly,
we found decreased binding of the RBD antibody to SARS-CoV-2 JN.1
virions treated at pH 2.0 compared to SARS-CoV-2 JN.1 virions treated at
pH 7.0. This was reflected in a decreased intensity ratio and Manders correlation (Figs. 6A, B and S6A) suggesting native epitope disruption and
therefore RBD unfolding. As Omicron variants such as JN.1 preferentially
adopt the closed S conformation40, these results show that the closed trimer
conformation does not protect from conformational changes in the RBD
induced by low pH. Although not significant, the SARS-CoV-2 S2 antibody
showed a signal increase for SARS-CoV-2 JN.1 virions that encountered
acidic pH (Figs. 6C, D and S6B), indicating that unfolding might also affect
theS2domainasobservedforSARS-CoV-2 BavPat1. Finally, we employed
the same assay to test the pH 2.0 insensitive virus HCoV-229E-Ren. We
used two HCoV-229E S antibodies, one binding the S1 subunit and one
binding to S2 (Fig. 6E–H). Both antibodies were determined to have a linear
epitope preference (Figs. S6C, D and S7B). Since HCoV-229E is substantially more stable at pH 2.0 than SARS-CoV-2 we expected to detect less
unfolding of S and indeed we did not observe changes in the intensity ratio of
the S2 antibody (Fig. 6G) and in Manders correlation for both antibodies
(Fig. 6F, H). However, we found a significant increase in the signal intensity
ratio for the HCoV-229E S1 antibody (Fig. 6E), suggesting that there are
slight changes in S structure, although the infectivity is retained. The raw
intensity sums of all acquired images are provided in Fig. S6E–H. To set
measurements across different viruses in relation to each other, we calculated the log2 fold change of the intensity ratios measured for all antibodies,
showninFig.6I. Interestingly, the only two antibodies that were below the
log2 fold change threshold of 1 were the HCoV-229 antibodies, highlighting that HCoV-229 S is more stable compared to SARS-CoV-2 S at pH 2.0. The
strongest effects were observed for the two NTD antibodies preferentially
binding to the denatured form of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 S and neutralizing
RBD antibodies binding either SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 or JN.1, emphasizing
that pH 2.0 efficiently induces unfolding events in the S1 subunit of SARS-
CoV-2.

In sum, our results show that SARS-CoV-2 virion membrane
integrity is not impaired by acidic pH even in extreme conditions like pH
2.2. However, SARS-CoV-2 virions lose their binding ability to target
cells when exposed to acidic pH of 2.8 or below, a process driven by
partial unfolding of S. Interestingly, HCoV-229E S is affected to a lesser
extent at the same conditions, suggesting that HCoV-229E S has a higher

* * *

Fig. 5 \| SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 RBD, NTD and S2 structure is affected by
acidic pH. A–C SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 virions were bound to coverslips and subsequently given a pH pulse for 1 min or left untreated (pH 7.0, pH 2.6, pH 2.0, and
untreated). After fixation and permeabilization, virions were stained for N as a
control (cyan) and different S antibodies. In (A) a neutralizing RBD antibody
(Cov2rbdc1-mab1, yellow) and an S2 antibody (NBP3-05701, magenta) were used,
in (B) virions were stained with an RBD antibody (#63847, magenta) exhibiting a
preference for linear epitopes, and in (C) virions were stained with the NTD antibody (MA5-36247, magenta). Samples were imaged with the SP8 (Leica). Shown are
representative images from three to four independent replicates. Scale bar corresponds to 10 μm. D–K Quantification of three to four images per pH condition from
three to four independent experiments each (n = 9 per group, except D, E where
n = 12 for undiluted, pH 7.0 and pH 2.6 and n = 13 for pH 2.0). In brief, a background
cut-off was defined for each channel and subtracted from the images. Only pixels
positive for N were considered in the following analyses to further reduce background and processing artefacts. For each image, the intensity ratio of the S antibody
signal to the N signal was calculated for the neutralizing RBD Cov2rbdc1-mab1 (D),
the S2 NBP3-05701 (F), the RBD #63847 (linear epitope preference) (H) and the
NTD MA5-36247 (J) antibody. Additionally, the Manders correlation coefficient
M1 was calculated using Coloc 2 (ImageJ), measuring the fraction of the N intensity

signal associated with the neutralizing RBD Cov2rbdc1-mab1 (E), the S2 NBP3-
05701 (G), the RBD #63847 (linear epitope preference) (I) or the NTD MA5-36247
(K) antibody signal. Error bars represent SD from the mean. All statistical tests were
done with a nonparametric one-way ANOVA (Kruskal–Wallis test, two-sided) in
GraphPad Prism with all conditions compared to the pH 7.0 control. Data was
considered non-significant (ns) if p values were 0.05 or above and significant for p
values below 0.05 (p < 0.05 ( _), p < 0.005 ( **), p < 0.0005 (**_)). L WB of three
different SARS-CoV-2 stock preparations (1, 2, and 3) showing N and S. Full-length
S0 as well as the S2 subunit were detected with the S2 antibody. M Full-lengths S0 and
S2 in (L) were quantified using Image Studio Lite and the S2 to full-length S0 ratio
was calculated (n = 3). Error bars represent SD from the mean. N Epitopes of used
antibodies visualized on S trimers with one monomer in the open conformation
(PDB ID: 6ZGG). For each antibody, the structural epitope preference (linear or
native) is indicated as well as the IF signal increase (↑) or decrease (↓) after treatment
at pH 2.0. S domains were colored on one monomer of the trimer in the open
conformation: NTD (turquois), RBD (yellow), CTD1 (dark green), CTD2 (light
green), fusion peptide (orange), central helix (dark blue), heptad repeat 1 (HR1, light
blue) and HR2 (purple). For each antibody, the epitope was colored in red, and
overlapping domains were colored in the assigned colors. If the epitope was
unknown within the S domain, the whole domain was colored red.

stability than SARS-CoV-2 S, resulting in retained infectivity even at
extreme pH conditions.

Discussion
Determining the physicochemical properties of IRPs and gaining knowl-

Discussion
Determining the physicochemical properties of IRPs and gaining knowledge on how virions are affected by these conditions are key to the development of new prevention strategies for airborne transmissible diseases.
Beyond sole virus inactivation kinetics, insights into the mechanisms of
inactivation are crucial to allow predictions about virus stability in IRPs and
airborne transmissibility across virus strains and species. In support of
global efforts to improve pandemic preparedness, this is especially important for viruses with recognized zoonotic potential like influenza A viruses
and coronaviruses. In this study, we focused on the inactivation mechanism
of SARS-CoV-2 at acidic pH encountered in small IRPs when exposed to
acidified air compositions, achieved by raising HNO3 concentrations in
indoor environments. Since respective HNO3 levels are considered nonhazardous, we do not expect adverse effects to human health. However, this
needs to be studied in more detail before any application. Further implementation of air acidification interventions would require real-time monitoring of HNO3 levels to avoid over exposure, while ensuring sufficient
levels for virus inactivation. We studied two coronaviruses (SARS-CoV-2
and HCoV-229E) in a non-aerosol system to isolate the effect of acidic pH
from other potential stressors in IRPs. Recently, Amruta et al. linked the
inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 at acidic pH to a general disruption of virions41.
Here we show that the viral envelope remains intact, while vRNPs are
structurally altered. This aligns with the observation that HCoV-229E is
stable at acidic pH of 2.0 (Fig. 1D), indicating that major structural components shared by both coronaviruses, such as the membrane, retain their
functionality in promoting viral entry.
Given that IAVs are efficiently inactivated at pH values below 5.5–6.0,

\\mathrm{p H}

\\mathrm{H N O\_{3}}

\\mathrm{H N O\_{3}}

We were able to detect conformational changes in the SARS-CoV-2
S2 subunit induced by acidic pH treatment with LiP LC-MS of recombinant
S. However, we only achieved S coverage of around 35%, therefore, we
continued to study S conformation on full virions with the help of S-specific
antibodies. All SARS-CoV-2 S antibodies tested showed clear differences in
signal intensity and Manders correlation after treatment at pH 2.0 compared
to pH 7.0 and subsequent neutralization, demonstrating structural changes
in S that are irreversible (Figs. 5, 6, S4 and S6). The observation that neutralizing RBD antibodies lose binding to S, while antibodies against linear
peptides gain binding, suggests unfolding of S domains, including the RBD
(Figs. 5, 6 and S4). This explains the lack of bound virions on the surface of
target cells (Fig. 3)andfits well to the modeling data from Niu et al. predicting major conformational changes in the RBD and S2 domain45.Dueto
virus titer restrictions, the number of virions was too low to observe
quantifiablechangesofSstructureornumberincryo-ET.Furthermore,all
cryo-ET samples were UV inactivated. Although the inactivation was performed under mild conditions to preserve overall virion structure, we
acknowledge that subtle conformational changes or local damage to S or
envelope components cannot be fully excluded. While our data suggests S
unfolding as the most likely inactivation mechanism, we acknowledge that
shedding of the S1 subunit might be an additional mechanism contributing
to decreased binding of SARS-CoV-2 virions. Although NTD signals as well
as signal for the RBD antibody with a linear epitope preference were
increased in samples treated at pH 2.0 indicating that a high number of S1 is
still present on virions, we cannot exclude the disruption of S trimers by
shedding one or two out of the three S1 subunits. Trimeric S may consist of a
mix of cleaved S1/2 and uncleaved S0 monomers, allowing such partial
S1 shedding. Of note, SARS-CoV-2 stocks with higher amounts of cleaved
S2 (Fig. 5M) did not differ in their inactivation kinetics from the stock with a
majority of uncleaved S0 (Figs. 1BandS1E).
We show that HCoV-229E S has a higher resistance to unfolding

* * *

A

E

B

C

F

G

Fig. 6 \| Structural changes of SARS-CoV-2 JN.1 S and HCoV-229E S. SARS-CoV-
2 JN1 virions (A–D) or HCoV-229E-Ren virions (E–H) were bound to coverslips
and subsequently given a pH pulse for 1 min or left untreated (pH 7.0, pH 2.0, and
untreated). As in Fig. 5D–H, the intensity ratio of the neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 JN.1
RBD MA5-47208 (A), the SARS-CoV-2 S2 NBP3-05701 (C), the HCoV-229E S1
40601-T62 (E) and the HCoV-229E S2 PIPA5120721 (G) antibody signal to the
corresponding N signal was calculated for each image. Additionally, the Manders
correlation coefficient M1 was calculated for the neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 JN.1
RBD MA5-47208 (B), the SARS-CoV-2 S2 NBP3-05701 (D), the HCoV-229E S1
40601-T62 (F) and the HCoV-229E S2 PIPA5120721 (H) antibody signal. Error bars
represent SD from the mean of three images derived from three independent

In summary, this study reveals that inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 by
acidic conditions occurs through partial denaturation of S structure and a
resulting defect in viral attachment. These findings contribute to a better
understanding of the physicochemical processes in IRPs, which is a

other stressors in IRPs on different virusesremainsanimportanttopicof
future research to understand transmissibility. Especially salt concentration,
48,49
controlled by RH, was shown to play a role in virus stability in IRPs.The
inactivation mechanism of respiratory viruses at high salt concentration as
encountered in IRPs is currently unknown. A recent study by Schaub et al.
suggests a more species-independent inactivation mechanism of disrupting
virion structure due to supersaturated salt concentration50.However,virus
strain-specific salt stabilities have been observed for IAV51, raising questions
about the exact mechanism of inactivation and viral strategies to compensate for the damaging effects of elevated salt concentration.
In summary, this study reveals that inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 by

Fig. 6 \| Structural changes of SARS-CoV-2 JN.1 S and HCoV-229E S. SARS-CoV-experiments (n = 9 per group). All statistical tests were done with a nonparametric
one-way ANOVA (Kruskal-Wallis test, two-sided) in GraphPad Prism with all
and subsequently given a pH pulse for 1 min or left untreated (pH 7.0, pH 2.0, and conditions compared to the pH 7.0 control. Data was considered non-significant
untreated). As in Fig. 5D–H, the intensity ratio of the neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 JN.1 (ns) if p values were 0.05 or above and significant for p values below 0.05 (p < 0.05
( _), p < 0.005 ( **), p < 0.0005 (**_)). I Log2 fold changes calculated for the intensity
ratios of all antibodies used in the study comparing the pH 2.0 to the pH 7.0
condition. Antibodies with a preference for native epitopes are depicted by blue
circles, while antibodies with a preference for linear epitopes are depicted by orange
squares. Dotted lines indicate a log2 fold change of −1 or 1. Error bars show the 95%
40601-T62 (F) and the HCoV-229E S2 PIPA5120721 (H) antibody signal. Error bars CI of the mean for each antibody (n = 9 per group, except RBD antibodies Imdevimab where n = 10 and Cov2rbdc1-mab1 where n = 13).

(^{4}),p<0.005(x^{4}times^{4}),p<0.0005(x^{4}\\times^{4})^{1})

Methods
Biophysical modeling

* * *

Cell lines and virus stocks
Huh-7 cells (kindly provided by Georg Kochs, Universitätsklinikum

Huh-7 cells (kindly provided by Georg Kochs, Universitätsklinikum
Freiburg, Germany) and Vero-E6 cells (kindly provided by Volker Thiel,
University of Bern, Switzerland) were cultured in complete DMEM
consisting of DMEM (41966-029, Gibco) supplemented with 10% Fetal
Bovine Serum (FBS, 10270-106, Gibco) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin
10,000 U/ml (P/S, 15140-122, Gibco). Vero-E6 cells stably expressing
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 (VAT), kindly provided by Sam Wilson (Uni-
52
versity of Glasgow, United Kingdom), were cultured in complete
DMEM with 2 mg/ml Geneticin (10131-035, Gibco) and 200 μg/ml
Hygromycin (10687010, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Experiments were
conducted with the SARS-CoV-2 strain BetaCoV/Germany/BavPat1/
36
2020 (BavPat1), provided by the European Virus Archive GLOBAL
(EVAg; Ref-SKU: 026V-03883), the SARS-CoV-2 JN.1 Omicron strain
SARS-CoV-2/human/Switzerland/ZH-UZH-IMV15/2024 (JN.1) isolated at the Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich (IMV,
UZH) and HCoV-229E-Ren as well as HCoV-229E WT, kindly provided
37
by Volker Thiel (University of Bern, Switzerland). All experiments
involving infectious SARS-CoV-2 were carried out in a biosafety level 3
(BSL3) facility at the IMV, UZH. Prior to the project, procedures were
approved and assessed by the Swiss Federal Office of Public Health
(Ecogen number A202808/3). BavPat1 and JN.1 were propagated in
VAT cells and Vero-E6 cells, respectively at an MOI of 0.001 and in
presence of 0.5 μg/ml TPCK Trypsin (T1426-50M, Sigma-Aldrich).
Supernatants were collected when cytopathic effects (CPE) were
observed for the majority of cells and cleared from cell debris by centrifugation. Subsequently, the supernatant was frozen in aliquots at
−80 °C or concentrated with Amicon Ultra-15, PLHK Ultracel-PL
Membrane, 100 kDa tubes (UFC910024, Milipore) by following the
manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 and
JN.1 supernatants revealed that our BavPat1 stock harbors the D614G
mutation and an intact furin cleavage site, while our JN.1 isolate lost the
furin cleavage site in the isolation process. HCoV-229E-Ren and HCoV-
229E WT were propagated on Huh-7 cells at 33 °C, without trypsin and
an MOI of 0.001 or 0,01, respectively. Supernatant was harvested after
72 h and either frozen at −80 °C or concentrated by ultracentrifugation
or with Amicon Ultra-15, PLHK Ultracel-PL Membrane, 100 kDa tubes.
Ultracentrifugation was performed through a 30% sucrose (84100, Fluka
Analytika) cushion at 112,400 × g for 90 min at 4 °C with the AH-629
rotor of a Sorvall WX 100 Ultra centrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Pellets were reconstituted in 300 μl of PBS.

200,\\up\ \\mu\\mathrm{g/m/},

0.5,\\upmu\\mathrm{m l}

-80,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

33,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C},

^112,400\\times8

300,\\upmu\\mathrm{l}

\\mathrm{a C c}{}mathrm\_{2}

Virus isolation
SARS-CoV-2 JN.1 was isolated on Vero-E6 cells from an anonymized
patient sample, diagnosed SARS-CoV-2 positive by the IMV, UZH in
September 2024 via PCR. Sequencing of the patient sample revealed that the
patient was infected with the JN.1 Omicron variant (GenBank PV414078.1).
First, the patient sample was sterile filtrated with a 0.45 μm filter and subsequently used for a 2-fold dilution series in DMEM. Vero-E6 cells were
5
then infected by mixing 2.5 × 10 cells (suspended in 500 μl complete
DMEM additionally supplemented with 2.5 μg/ml Amphotericin B
(15290018, Thermo Fisher Scientific)) with the sample dilutions in a 24-well
plate. Infected cells were incubated at 37 °C and monitored for CPE daily. If
CPE was detected the supernatant was harvested, cleared from cell debris by
centrifugation and subsequently used for standard plaque assay on Vero-E6
cells. After 4–5 days, single plaques were picked with a pipette tip and diluted
in 200 μl DMEM used for infection of Vero-E6 cells. For that purpose,
5
5×10 Vero-E6 cells were seeded per well of a 6-well plate one day in
advance. Infection was allowed to proceed for 1 h at 37 °C with occasional
shaking to distribute the inoculum. After the completion of 1 h, 2 ml of
complete DMEM was added to the well and the infected cells were incubated
at 37 °C until CPE was detected. Supernatant was collected, cleared from cell
debris by centrifugation, aliquoted, and frozen at −80 °C. The obtained
Omicron isolate was named SARS-CoV-2/human/Switzerland/ZH-UZH-
IMV15/2024.

0.45,\\upmu\\mathrm{m}

\[,37,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
2.5\\times10^{5}\
\
\\mathrm{H}{}\_{2}\\mathrm{O}\
\
Virus titration: plaque assay and foci assay\
SARS-CoV-2 titers were determined by standard plaque assay on VAT cells\
reaching a detection limit of 10 plaque-forming units (PFU)/ml. Of note, no\
trypsin was added to the overlay and the virus was allowed to replicate for\
~44 h before fixation and plaque detection. HCoV-229E-Ren was titrated by\
foci assay on Huh-7 cells. Cells were seeded 1 day in advance on poly-lysine\
(P4832, Sigma-Aldrich) coated 12-well plates to reach 100% confluency on\
the day of infection. Cells were infected with HCoV-229E in 100 μl PBSi\
consisting of DPBS (14190-094, Gibco) supplemented with 0.2% BSA\
Fraction V (1ET4.3, Roth), 1% P/S, 1 mM CaCl2 (102378, Sigma-Aldrich),\
and 1 mM MgCl2 (M2670, Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated at 33 °C for 1 h.\
Virus was allowed to replicate for ~72 h at 33 °C before fixation with 3.7%\
formaldehyde (47608, Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS. Cells were blocked and\
permeabilized for 1 h at RT with confocal buffer consisting of 50 mM\
NH4Cl (31107, Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% Saponin (47036, Sigma-Aldrich) and\
2% BSA (A7906, Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS, followed by incubation with a\
rabbit anti-N antibody (40640-T62, Sino Biological) in confocal buffer for\
1–2h(Table 1). Cells were washed with PBS and then incubated with an\
anti-Rabbit Peroxidase antibody (A0545, Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at RT\
(Table 1). Again, cells were washed with PBS and subsequently H2Obefore\
addition of TrueBlue Peroxidase Substrate KPL (5510-0030, Seracare) for\
15 min at RT. After removing the substrate, foci were counted by eye to\
determine the titer in foci-forming units (FFU)/ml.\
\
33,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
37,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
5\\times10^{5}\
\
\\mathrm{M g C l\_{2}}\
\
Acidification of viruses\
Milli-Q H2O was adjusted to pH 7.1 or pH 2.6 with the disodium phosphate\
\
Acidification of viruses\
Milli-Q H2O was adjusted to pH 7.1 or pH 2.6 with the disodium phosphate\
(71645 Sigma-Aldrich) and citric acid (C1909 Sigma-Aldrich) buffer system\
described by Sigma-Aldrich53 and measured with the Ultra-Micro-ISM\
electrode and FiveEasy pH meter (Mettler Toledo). pH 2.0 was reached in a\
0.1 M citric acid solution. SARS-CoV-2 was spiked into neutral (pH 7.1) or\
acidifiedwaterina1:20dilutionandthepHwasmeasuredwiththeOrion™\
9810BN Micro pH Electrode (9810BN, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and\
Orion™ Versa Star Pro™ pH/LogR™ Benchtop Meter (VSTAR81, Thermo\
Fisher Scientific). The reported pH has an inaccuracy of ±0.1 units due to\
variation between different replicates. Neutralization was performed by\
diluting samples 1:100 in PBSi additionally buffered with 3.5 mM citric acid\
and 33 mM disodium phosphate (pH 7 PBSi). Sample dilution allows\
neutralization without using strong bases, potentially affecting virus titer. To\
obtain samples with higher virus titers for attachment assays and cryo-ET,\
the reaction titer was increased by spiking SARS-CoV-2 into acidified water\
in a 1:2 dilution. In this case, a pH of 2.8 was reached in a reaction containing\
0.2 M citric acid. For HCoV-229E, concentrated stock was directly acidified\
to achieve the highest possible titer. 10× pH 7 buffer (176 mM citric acid and\
165 mM disodium phosphate) or 1 M citric acid was diluted 1:10 in HCoV-\
229E stock reaching a reaction pH of 7.1 and 2.0, respectively. To test the\
effects of different concentration methods and virus titers during the pH\
reaction, HCoV-229E-Ren stocks were spiked into neutral or acidified water\
in a 1:10, 1:20, or 1:100 dilution as described for SARS-CoV-2. To analyze S\
conformation on SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1, JN.1 and HCoV-229E virions via\
7 5 5\
IF, 10 PFU, 5 × 10 PFU, or 7.5 × 10 FFU, respectively, were centrifuged\
onto cover slips in 200 μl PBSi for 30 min at 1000 × g and 4 °C. Subsequently,\
cover slips were washed and 300 μl buffered water at pH 7.1, pH 2.6, or pH\
2.0 was added. After 1 min incubation, the buffered water was removed, and\
cover slips were washed three times to neutralize the virus. Virions on cover\
slips were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, 15710, Lucerna) in PBS\
prior to IF staining.\
\
\\mathrm{H}{}\_{2}\\mathrm{O}\
\
Plunge freezing\
SARS-CoV-2 was UV inactivated with the UV Analysis Lamp UV-4 S\
(29 50 400, Herolab) for 10 min in 24-well plates. A maximum of 600 μl\
were inactivated at a time and inactivation efficiency was validated by\
plaque assay. Additionally, we tested the inactivation in outgrowth assays\
by incubating inactivated SARS-CoV-2 samples on VAT cells for 7 days.\
No CPE was observed in outgrowth assays for inactivated samples and\
plaque assays of the retrieved supernatants were negative. Holey carbon\
\
7.5\\times10^{5};\ {mathrm F F F}\
\
10^{7};\\mathrm{P F U},5\\times10^{5};\\mathrm{P F U}\
\
* * *\
\
Table 1 \| Antibody summary including dilutions for different assays\
\
| Antibody | WB | IF | Foci |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| Human coronavirus(HCoV-229E)Nucleocapsid Antibody,Rabbit PAb,Antigen Affinity Purified,40640-T62 Sino Biological,RRID:AB\_3676912 |  |  | 1:10,000 |\
| Anti-Rabbit IgG(whole molecule)-Peroxidase antibody produced in goat,A0545,Sigma-Aldrich,RRID:AB\_257896 |  |  | 1:10,000 |\
| SARS/SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid Monoclonal Antibody,MA5-29981,Thermo Fisher Scientific,RRID:AB\_2785780 | 1:1000 | 1:1000 |  |\
| SARS-CoV-2 Spike RBD monoclonal human IgG1 antibody(Clone H4),cov2rbdc1-mab1,Invivogen | 1:1000 | 1:100 |  |\
| Imdevimab(Synonyms:REGN10987);HY-P99342,Medchem Express,RRID:AB\_3695156 | 1:1000 | 1:2000 |  |\
| SARS-CoV-2 Spike S2 Antibody-BSA Free,NBP3-05701,Novus Bio,RRID:AB\_3534207 | 1:1000 | 1:400 |  |\
| SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein(RBD)(E7B3E)Rabbit mAb,#63847 Cell Signaling Technology,RRID:AB\_3674090 | 1:1000 | 1:200 |  |\
| SARS-CoV-2 Spike ProteinS1 Recombinant Rabbit Monoclonal Antibody(HL6),MA5-36247,Thermo Fisher Scientific,RRID:AB\_2890589 | 1:1000 | 1:50 |  |\
| SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein(S1-NTD)Antibody,#56996,Cell Signaling,RRID:AB\_3492098 | 1:1000 | 1:200 |  |\
| SARS-CoV-2 Spike ProteinRBD Omicron Recombinant Rabbit Monoclonal Antibody(HL1867),MA5-47208 Thermo Fisher Scientific,RRID:AB\_2938280 | 1:1000 | 1:500 |  |\
| Human coronavirus(HCoV-229E)Nucleocapsid Antibody,Mouse Mab,40640-MM11,Sino Biological,RRID:AB\_3676911 | 1:1000 | 1:400 |  |\
| Human coronavirus(HCoV-229E)Spike S1 Antibody,Rabbit PAb,Antigen Affinity Purified,40601-T62 Sino Biological | 1:1000 | 1:100 |  |\
| HCoV-229E Spike S2 Polyclonal Antibody,PIPA5120721,Invitrogen,RRID:AB\_2914293 | 1:1000 | 1:100 |  |\
| GAPDH Antibody(FL-335),sc-25778,Santa Cruz,RRID:AB\_10167668 | 1:2000 |  |  |\
| IRDye anti-rabbit 800CW,926-32211,Li-Cor,RRID:AB\_621843 | 1:10,000 |  |  |\
| IRDye anti-mouse 680RD,926-68070,Li-Cor,RRID:AB\_10956588 | 1:10,000 |  |  |\
| Donkey anti-Mouse IgG(H+L)Highly Cross-Adsorbed Secondary AntibodyAlexa Fluor™488,A-21202;Thermo Fisher Scientific,RRID:AB\_141607 |  | 1:1000 |  |\
| Goat anti-Human IgG(H+L)Cross-Adsorbed Secondary AntibodyAlexa Fluor 594,A-11014;Thermo Fisher Scientific),RRID:AB\_2534081 |  | 1:1000 |  |\
| Donkey anti-Rabbit IgG(H+L)Highly Cross-Adsorbed Secondary AntibodyAlexa Fluor™647,A-31573;Thermo Fisher scientific,RRID:AB\_2536183 |  | 1:1000 |  |\
\
reconstruction\
Cryo-ET was performed using a Krios cryo-TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific)\
operated at 300 keV and equipped with a post-column BioQuantum Gatan\
Imaging energy filter (Gatan) and K3 direct electron detector (Gatan) with\
an energy slit set to 15 eV. As a first step, positions on the grid were mapped\
at 8700× (pixel spacing of 10.64 Å) using a defocus of ~−65 μm in\
SerialEM54 to localize SARS-CoV-2 virions. Tilt series were acquired using a\
dose-symmetric tilting scheme55 with a nominal tilt range of 60° to −60°\
with 3° increments with SerialEM. Due to the higher concentration of the\
stock sample, tilt series were acquired using PACEtomo56 (version 1.6.1) in\
SerialEM (version 4.1.0 beta). Tilt series were acquired at target defocus\
−\
range of −3to−4 μm, with an electron dose per record of 3 e /Å2 and a\
magnification of ×33,000 (pixel spacing of 2.671 Å). Beam-induced sample\
57\
motion and drift were corrected using MotionCor2 (version 1.3.1). Tilt\
series were aligned using the fiducial model in IMOD58 (version 5.0.1).\
Tomograms were reconstructed using R-weighted back projection algorithm with dose-weighting filter and SIRT-like filter 5 in IMOD58.InIMOD,\
12 slices of the final tomogram were averaged for visualization.\
\
Cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET) and tomogram\
reconstruction\
Cryo-ET was performed using a Krios cryo-TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific)\
\
\ 1113,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
grids (Cu 200 mesh, R2/1, Quantifoil®) were plasma-cleaned for 10 s in a Measurements in tomograms\
Gatan Solarus 950 (Gatan). Samples were mixed (1:10) with 10× con-Diameter and spikes per virion were measured manually in IMOD58.One\
centrated 10 nm protein A gold (Aurion) prior plunge freezing. Stock contourwithtwopointswasusedtomeasurethediameterononeaxis.Two\
samples (3 μl) were applied on a grid for plunge freezing into liquid axes were measured (long/a and short/b), and the mean was used as the\
ethane using an automatic plunge freezer EM GP2 (Leica). The ethane mean diameter per virion. Spikes per virion were counted manually in\
temperature was set to −183 °C and the chamber to room temperature IMOD using the object category in the model to separate pre- and postfuwith 80% humidity. Grids were blotted from the back with Whatman™ sion spikes. Points were used to count individual spikes. The sphericity\
Type 1 paper for 2.5 s. Neutralized samples (3 μl) were applied on a grid (eccentricity) was calculated by using the formula shown below.\
for plunge freezing into liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV (Thermo\
pffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi\
Fisher Scientific) with 5 s blotting time and room temperature with 99%\
\
Measurements in tomograms\
Diameter and spikes per virion were measured manually in IMOD58\
\
e={\\frac{\\sqrt{(a^{2}-b^{2})}}{a}}\
\
37,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
* * *\
\
System (Applied biosystems). Genomic copy numbers were determined\
with the 7300 System SDS Software (version 1.4) by preparing a standard\
curve from the pGBW-m4252984 vector (153898, Addgene). Results\
were analyzed as follows: First, genomic copies (GC) after RNase\
digestion were divided by GC measured without RNase digestion of the\
same sample, resulting in the fraction of maintained genomes (c). Subsequently, c was normalized to c0 (c of the 10 s pH 7 sample) from the\
same experiment. Data was logarithmically transformed showing log10 of\
GC loss of each sample relative to the 10 s pH 7 sample. Additionally, this\
calculation was performed on the infectious titers as determined by\
plaque assay from the same samples. The correlation between log10 PFU\
reduction and log10 GC reduction was calculated with GraphPad Prism\
(version 10.2.3) using a linear regression model.\
\
\\log\_{10}\
\
\\mathrm{l o g}\_{10}\
\
\\mathrm{l o g}\_{10}\
\
Infection and attachment assay\
VAT cells were seeded onto cover slips one day prior to infection. If samples\
\
37,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
4,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
37,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
Limited proteolysis (LiP) liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)\
Recombinant trimeric S (40589-V08H8, Sino Biological) was diluted in\
\
Recombinant trimeric S (40589-V08H8, Sino Biological) was diluted in\
H2O according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and split into two\
equal portions of 50 μg. The trimers were then treated for 2 min at pH 2.0 or\
7.0 by adding 1 M citric acid or 10× pH 7 buffer in a 1:10 ratio to the solution\
as described in section “acidification of viruses”. Subsequently, the solutions\
were neutralized by diluting samples 1:20 in PBS additionally buffered with\
3.5 mM citric acid and 33 mM disodium phosphate. We used Amicon tubes\
(UFC5050) to concentrate S trimers and rebuffer to LiP buffer (20 mM\
HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, and 10 mM MgCl2). Resulting S concentra-\
C\
tions were measured by NanoDrop (NanoDrop One, Thermo Fisher\
Scientific) and BCA assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kits, 23227 Thermo\
Fisher Scientific). Samples were adjusted to the same protein concentration.\
We performed LiP-MS in four analytical replicates per sample, using 3 μg of\
S per replicate supplemented with 7.5 μg of BSA. LiP was essentially exe-\
59\
cuted as described by Malinovska et al. with minor modifications. In brief,\
all samples were digested by proteinase K (MC505, Promega) for 5 min at\
25 °C at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w). Next, proteins were\
denatured at 99 °C and adjusted to 5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), followed by reduction, alkylation, and full tryptic digestion (V5113, Promega)\
at 1% SDC. Afterwards, SDC was removed by acid precipitation and MW\
filtering. Remaining peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips. LC-MS\
analysis of purified peptides was performed with the ACQUITY UPLC\
M-Class System (Waters) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480\
Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data independent acquisition mode. The resulting chromatographic data was analyzed by\
using directDIA workflow in Spectronaut (19.9.250422.62635) allowing for\
semi-tryptic peptides. Results for all identified peptides are provided in\
Supplementary Data 1 and raw data are available via ProteomeXchange\
with identifier PXD064612.\
\
Immunofluorescent (IF) staining\
After fixation and washing, samples were blocked and permeabilized with\
confocal buffer for 1 h at RT and subsequently stained with the primary\
antibodiesfor2hinconfocalbuffer.Primary antibodies against SARS-\
CoV-2 antigens are anti-N (MA5-29981, Thermo Fisher Scientific), anti-\
RBD (cov2rbdc1-mab1, Invivogen), Imdevimab (HY-P99342, Medchem\
Express), anti-RBD (#63847, Cell Signaling Technologies), anti-NTD\
\
99{\\dot{\\circ}}^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
(MA5-36247, Thermo Fisher Scientific), anti-NTD (#56996, Cell Signaling), and anti-S2 (NBP3-05701, Novus Bio) (Table 1). Only the anti-N and\
anti-S2 SARS-CoV-2 antibodies were able to bind to SARS-CoV-2 JN.1,\
therefore, we selected an additional RBD antibody (MA5-47208, Thermo\
Fisher Scientific) neutralizing Omicron variants. For staining of HCoV-\
229E virions, we used anti-N (40640-MM11, Sino Biological), anti-S1\
(40601-T62, Sino Biological), and anti-S2 (PA5120721, Invitrogen) antibodies (Table 1). Samples were washed and stained with secondary antibodies and DAPI (10236276001, Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h. The following\
secondary antibodies were used: anti-Mouse Alexa 488, anti-Human Alexa\
594, and anti-Rabbit Alexa 647 (A-21202, A-11014, and A-31573, Thermo\
Fisher Scientific) (Table 1). Of note, if anti-Human Alexa 594 was used,\
staining was performed prior to a second round of primary and secondary\
antibody staining, since unspecific binding of anti-Human Alexa 594 to our\
SARS-CoV-2 N antibody was observed. For virus attachment assays, cells\
were washed with PBS after completion of the IF staining and additionally\
stained with a 1:2000 dilution of CellBrite® NIR680 (#30070, Biotium) in\
PBS. Finally, cover slips were mounted with ProLong® Gold Antifade\
Mountant (P36930, Thermo Fisher Scientific).\
\
25,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
\\mathrm{S I M}^{2}\
\
95\ ^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}\
\
Fluorescent imaging, image processing and analysis\
For images of single-cycle infections, the DMi8 microscope (Leica) was used\
in combination with the inbuilt THUNDER Instant Computational\
Clearing Algorithm (ICC, Leica). Images were exported from the LAS X\
software (version 3.0.2.16120, Leica). To image virions on cover slips in the\
absence of cells, the SP8 confocal laser scanning microscope (Leica) was\
used. Images were imported into ImageJ (version 2.14.0; Java 1.8.0\_172) and\
background was subtracted. The inbuilt Coloc 2 package was used to calculate intensity sums and Manders correlation for each image using the N\
channel as a mask (area of interest). Three to four images per experiment\
were quantified and plotted in GraphPad Prism. To calculate fold changes in\
intensity ratios all values of the pH 2.0 condition were normalized to the\
average of the pH 7.0 condition. The mean as well as upper and lower limits\
(determined by the 95% confidence interval) of each data set were calculated\
with GraphPad Prism (version 10.2.3) and log2 transformed. For virus\
attachment assays, a super-resolution approach was chosen to obtain a\
better z-resolution. Samples were imaged with the ELYRA 7 (Zeiss) in\
combination with the ZEN software (black edition 3.0, Zeiss). Lattice SIM2\
Processing was used for deconvolution (Zeiss). A high signal-to-noise ratio\
(SNR) approach was used for the membrane staining with 25 iterations and\
a regularization weight of 0.007, while a medium SNR approach with 20\
iterations and a regularization weight of 0.2 was applied for the N staining of\
virions. The resulting data was imported into Bitplane Imaris (version\
10.1.1) to create maximal projections and extended x-z- and y-z-projections.\
Figures were assembled with Affinity Designer 2 (version 2.4.2).\
\
Western blot and band quantification\
VAT cells were infected with an MOI of 2 of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 or\
\
Western blot and band quantification\
VAT cells were infected with an MOI of 2 of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 or\
\
JN.1 and lysed at 16 or 20 hpi, respectively, with Laemmli Sample Buffer\
(1610747, Bio-Rad) supplemented with 10% β-mercaptoethanol (BME,\
M6250, Sigma-Aldrich). Huh-7 cells were infected with HCoV-229E WT\
\
M6250, Sigma-Aldrich). Huh-7 cells were infected with HCoV-229E WT\
at an MOI of 4 and lysed with Laemmli Sample Buffer containing BME\
after 28 hpi. SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 stock samples were lysed 1:2 in\
Laemmli Sample Buffer containing BME. Samples were heated to 95 °C\
for 5–10 min before loading on a\
(NW04120BOX, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Precision Plus Protein™\
All Blue Prestained Protein Standards (#1610373, Bio-Rad) were used to\
determine protein sizes. Proteins were separated by PAGE and transferred to a 0.45 μm nitrocellulose membrane (10600008, Amersham)\
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Afterwards, the membrane\
was blocked in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.1% Tween20\
(93773, Sigma-Aldrich) (TBS-T) and 5% milk (T145.3, Roth). Proteins\
were incubated with primary antibodies binding S, N, or GAPDH in\
TBS-T with 5% milk at 4 °C overnight (Table 1). Membranes were\
washed and secondary antibodies, IRDye anti-rabbit 800CW and IRDye\
\
M6250, Sigma-Aldrich). Huh-7 cells were infected with HCoV-229E WT\
at an MOI of 4 and lysed with Laemmli Sample Buffer containing BME\
after 28 hpi. SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 stock samples were lysed 1:2 in\
Laemmli Sample Buffer containing BME. Samples were heated to 95 °C\
a Bolt 4–12% Bis-Tris 1.0 mm gel\
(NW04120BOX, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Precision Plus Protein™\
All Blue Prestained Protein Standards (#1610373, Bio-Rad) were used to\
determine protein sizes. Proteins were separated by PAGE and transferred to a 0.45 μm nitrocellulose membrane (10600008, Amersham)\
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Afterwards, the membrane\
was blocked in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.1% Tween20\
(93773, Sigma-Aldrich) (TBS-T) and 5% milk (T145.3, Roth). Proteins\
were incubated with primary antibodies binding S, N, or GAPDH in\
TBS-T with 5% milk at 4 °C overnight (Table 1). Membranes were\
washed and secondary antibodies, IRDye anti-rabbit 800CW and IRDye\
\
Western blot and band quantification\
VAT cells were infected with an MOI of 2 of SARS-CoV-2 BavPat1 or\
\
4,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C} anti-mouse 680RD (926-32211 and 926-68070, Li-Cor), were applied to\
the membrane in TBS-T with 5% milk and incubated for 1 h at RT\
(Table 1). Images were generated with the Odyssey Fc Imager (Li-Cor)\
and the signal was quantified with Image Studio Lite (version 5.2, Li-\
Cor). All uncropped WBs are provided in Fig. S8.\
\
Statistics and reproducibility\
All statistical tests concerning microscopy images (IF and cryo-ET quan-\
\
All statistical tests concerning microscopy images (IF and cryo-ET quantification)aswellaslinearregressionforRNasedigestionassaydatawere\
performed in GraphPad Prism (version 10.2.3). For cryo-ET data, the\
nonparametric Mann-Whitney test (two-tailed) was used, and for IF-based\
data, we conducted nonparametric one-way ANOVA (Kruskal–Wallis test,\
two-sided) comparing all conditions to the pH 7.0 control. Data was considered non-significant (ns) if p values were 0.05 or above and significant for\
p values below 0.05 (p < 0.05 ( _), p < 0.005 ( **), p < 0.0005 (**_)). Exact p\
values and 95% confidence intervals are provided in Supplementary Data 2.\
For LiP LC-MS statistics were performed in Spectronaut\
(19.9.250422.62635), and peptides with a higher negative log10 p value than\
2.439 (corresponding to a Q value of 0.05) were considered significant.\
\
\ {0.05;(\\mathtt{p}<0.05;(^{ _}),\\mathtt{p}<0.005;(^{ **}),\\mathtt{p}<0.0005;(^{**_\*}))}\
\
Reporting summary\
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio\
\
Data availability\
All data, except for the raw LiP-MS data, supporting the findings of this\
\
Data availability\
All data, except for the raw LiP-MS data, supporting the findings of this\
study are available within the paper and its supplementary information files.\
Uncropped blots are provided in Fig. S8. LiP LC-MS data have been\
deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE60 partner\
repository with the dataset identifier PXD064612. Results for all peptides\
identified in LiP LC-MS are provided in Supplementary Data 1. The\
sequence of the SARS-CoV-2 JN.1 isolate is available on GenBank\
(PV414078.1). Source data of graphs presented in the figuresaswellasexact\
p values are available in Supplementary Data 2. Any additional data is\
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.\
\
Received: 5 February 2025; Accepted: 10 July 2025;\
\
References\
\
01. World Health Organization (WHO). WHO COVID-19 dashboard,\
    accessed 19 June 2024 [https://data.who.int/dashboards/covid19/](https://data.who.int/dashboards/covid19/)\
    deaths?n=o.\
02. Peacock, T. P. et al. The furin cleavage site in the SARS-CoV-2 spike\
    protein is required for transmission in ferrets. Nat. Microbiol. 6,\
    899–909 (2021).\
03. Rachid, E. et al. Distinctive roles of furin and TMPRSS2 in SARS-CoV-\
    2 infectivity. J. Virol. 96, e00128–22 (2022).\
04. Jackson, C. B., Farzan, M., Chen, B. & Choe, H. Mechanisms of\
    SARS-CoV-2 entry into cells. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23,3–20 (2022).\
05. Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and\
    TMPRSS2 and is blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell\
    181, 271–280.e8 (2020).\
06. Walls, A. C. et al. Structure, function, and antigenicity of the SARS-\
    CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. Cell 181, 281–292.e6 (2020).\
07. Wrobel, A. G. et al. SARS-CoV-2 and bat RaTG13 spike glycoprotein\
    structures inform on virus evolution and furin-cleavage effects. Nat.\
    Struct. Mol. Biol. 27, 763–767 (2020).\
08. Letko, M., Marzi, A. & Munster, V. Functional assessment of cell entry\
    and receptor usage for SARS-CoV-2 and other lineage B\
    betacoronaviruses. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 562–569 (2020).\
09. Wrapp, D. et al. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the\
    prefusion conformation. Science 367, 1260–1263 (2020).\
10. Benton, D. J. et al. Receptor binding and priming of the spike protein of\
    SARS-CoV-2 for membrane fusion. Nature 588, 327–330 (2020).\
    Communications Biology \| (2025) 8:1082\
\
References\
\
01. World Health Organization (WHO). WHO COVID-19 dashboard,\
\
02. Pak, A. J., Yu, A., Ke, Z., Briggs, J. A. G. & Voth, G. A. Cooperative\
    multivalent receptor binding promotes exposure of the SARS-CoV-2\
    fusion machinery core. Nat. Commun. 13, 1002 (2022).\
\
03. Shi, W. et al. Cryo-EM structure of SARS-CoV-2 postfusion spike in\
    membrane. Nature 619, 403–409 (2023).\
\
04. Leung, N. H. L. Transmissibility and transmission of respiratory\
    viruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 528–545 (2021).\
\
05. Leung, N. H. L. & Milton, D. K. New WHO proposed terminology for\
    respiratory pathogen transmission. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. [https://doi](https://doi/).\
    org/10.1038/s41579-024-01067-5 (2024).\
\
06. Glas, I. & David, S. C. A new chapter of healthy indoor air: antiviral air\
    treatments. EMBO Mol. Med. 15, e18710 (2023).\
\
07. Chan, C. K., Liang, Z., Zheng, J., Clegg, S. L. & Brimblecombe, P.\
    Thermodynamic properties of aqueous aerosols to high supersaturation: I\
    —measurements of water activity of the system Na+− Cl−− NO− 3−\
    SO2− 4− H2O at~ 298.15 K. Aerosol. Sci. Technol. 27, 324–344 (1997).\
\
08. Marcolli, C., Luo, B. & Peter, T. Mixing of the organic aerosol fractions:\
    liquids as the thermodynamically stable phases. J. Phys. Chem. A\
    108, 2216–2224 (2004).\
\
09. Stewart, D. J. et al. Liquid–liquid phase separation in mixed organic/\
    inorganic single aqueous aerosol droplets. J. Phys. Chem. A 119,\
    4177–4190 (2015).\
\
10. Znamenskaya, Y., Sotres, J., Engblom, J., Arnebrant, T. &\
    Kocherbitov, V. Effect of hydration on structural and thermodynamic\
    properties of pig gastric and bovine submaxillary gland mucins. J.\
    Phys. Chem. B 116, 5047–5055 (2012).\
\
11. Pye, H. O. T. et al. The acidity of atmospheric particles and clouds.\
    Atmos. Chem. Phys. 20, 4809–4888 (2020).\
\
12. Kakavas, S., Patoulias, D., Zakoura, M., Nenes, A. & Pandis, S. N.\
    Size-resolved aerosol pH over Europe during summer. Atmos. Chem.\
    Phys. 21, 799–811 (2021).\
\
13. Klein, L. K. et al. Expiratory aerosol pH is determined by indoor room\
    trace gases and particle size. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 119,\
    e2212140119 (2022).\
\
14. Luo, B. et al. Expiratory aerosol pH: the overlooked driver of airborne\
    virus inactivation. Environ. Sci. Technol. 57, 486–497 (2023).\
\
15. Haddrell, A. et al. Differences in airborne stability of SARS-CoV-2\
    variants of concern is impacted by alkalinity of surrogates of\
    respiratory aerosol. J. R. Soc. Interface 20, 20230062 (2023).\
\
16. Oswin, H. P. et al. The dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 infectivity with changes\
    in aerosol microenvironment. PNAS 119, e2200109119 (2022).\
\
17. Milton, D. K., Fabian, M. P., Cowling, B. J., Grantham, M. L. &\
    McDevitt, J. J. Influenza virus aerosols in human exhaled breath:\
    particle size, culturability, and effect of surgical masks. PLoS Pathog.\
    9, e1003205–e1003205 (2013).\
\
18. Lindsley, W. G. et al. Viable influenza A virus in airborne particles\
    expelled during coughs versus exhalations. Influenza Other Respir.\
    Viruses 10, 404–413 (2016).\
\
19. Alsved, M. et al. Size distribution of exhaled aerosol particles\
    containing SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Infect. Dis.55, 158–163 (2023).\
\
20. Boydston,J.A.etal.Aerosolparticlesizeinfluences the infectious dose\
    and disease severity in a golden Syrian hamster model of inhalational\
    COVID-19. J. Aerosol Med. Pulm. Drug Deliv. 36, 235–245 (2023).\
\
21. Lowen, A. C., Mubareka, S., Steel, J. & Palese, P. Influenza virus\
    transmission is dependent on relative humidity and temperature.\
    PLoS Pathog. 3, 1470–1476 (2007).\
\
22. Kormuth, K. A. et al. Influenza virus infectivity is retained in aerosols\
    and droplets independent of relative humidity. J. Infect. Dis. 218,\
    739–747 (2018).\
\
23. David, S. C. et al. Inactivation mechanisms of influenza A virus under\
    pH conditions encountered in aerosol particles as revealed by wholevirus HDX-MS. mSphere 8, e00226-23 (2023).\
\
24. Zhou, T. et al. Cryo-EM structures of SARS-CoV-2 spike without and with\
    ACE2 reveal a pH-dependent switch to mediate endosomal positioning of\
    receptor-binding domains. Cell Host Microbe 28, 867–879.e5 (2020).\
\
\
* * *\
\
34. Qu, K. et al. Engineered disulfide reveals structural dynamics of locked\
    SARS-CoV-2 spike. PLOS Pathog. 18, e1010583 (2022).\
\
35. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) -\
\
36. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) -\
    Center of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Nitric acid. https://\
    [www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0447.html](http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0447.html).\
\
37. Wölfel, R. et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with\
\
38. Wölfel, R. et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with\
    COVID-2019. Nature 581, 465–469 (2020).\
\
39. van den Worm, S. H. E. et al. Reverse genetics of SARS-related\
\
40. van den Worm, S. H. E. et al. Reverse genetics of SARS-related\
    coronavirus using vaccinia virus-based recombination. PLoS ONE 7,\
    e32857 (2012).\
\
41. Lin, K., Schulte, C. R. & Marr, L. C. Survival of MS2 and Φ6 viruses in\
\
42. Lin, K., Schulte, C. R. & Marr, L. C. Survival of MS2 and Φ6 viruses in\
    droplets as a function of relative humidity, pH, and salt, protein, and\
    surfactant concentrations. PLoS ONE 15, e0243505 (2020).\
\
43. Marcink, T. C. et al. Intermediates in SARS-CoV-2 spike–mediated cell\
\
44. Calvaresi, V. et al. Structural dynamics in the evolution of SARS-CoV-\
    2 spike glycoprotein. Nat. Commun. 14, 1421 (2023).\
\
45. Amruta, N. et al. Effect of acetic acid inactivation of SARS-CoV-2.\
\
46. Amruta, N. et al. Effect of acetic acid inactivation of SARS-CoV-2.\
    PLoS ONE 18, e0276578 (2023).\
\
47. Russell, C. J. In Acid-Induced Membrane Fusion by the Hemagglutinin\
\
48. Russell, C. J. In Acid-Induced Membrane Fusion by the Hemagglutinin\
    Protein and Its Role in Influenza Virus Biology BT - Influenza\
    Pathogenesis and Control - Volume I. (eds. Compans, R. W. &\
    Oldstone, M. B. A.) 93–116 (Springer International Publishing, 2014).\
\
49. Kemble, G. W., Bodian, D. L., Rosé, J., Wilson, I. A. & White, J. M.\
\
50. Kemble, G. W., Bodian, D. L., Rosé, J., Wilson, I. A. & White, J. M.\
    Intermonomer disulfide bonds impair the fusion activity of influenza\
    virus hemagglutinin. J. Virol. 66, 4940–4950 (1992).\
\
51. Rui, X. & Wilson, I. A. Structural characterization of an early fusion\
\
52. Rui, X. & Wilson, I. A. Structural characterization of an early fusion\
    intermediate of influenza virus hemagglutinin. J. Virol. 85, 5172–5182\
    (2011).\
\
53. Niu, Z. et al. Simulations of pH and thermal effects on SARS-CoV-2\
\
54. Niu, Z. et al. Simulations of pH and thermal effects on SARS-CoV-2\
    spike glycoprotein. Front. Mol. Biosci. 12, 1545041 (2025).\
\
55. Dabisch, P. A. et al. Comparison of the survival of different isolates of\
\
56. Bushmaker, T. et al. Comparative aerosol and surface stability of\
    SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. Emerg. Infect. Dis. J. 29, 1033\
    (2023).\
\
57. Yang, W., Elankumaran, S. & Marr, L. C. Relationship between\
\
58. Yang, W., Elankumaran, S. & Marr, L. C. Relationship between\
    humidity and influenza A viability in droplets and implications for\
    Influenza’s seasonality. PLoS ONE 7, e46789 (2012).\
\
59. Morris, D. H. et al. Mechanistic theory predicts the effects of\
\
60. Schaub, A. et al. Salt supersaturation as accelerator of influenza A\
    virus inactivation in 1-μl droplets. Environ. Sci. Technol. 58,\
    18856–18869 (2024).\
\
61. Labadie, T., Batéjat, C., Manuguerra, J.-C. & Leclercq, I. Influenza\
\
62. Labadie, T., Batéjat, C., Manuguerra, J.-C. & Leclercq, I. Influenza\
    virus segment composition influences viral stability in the\
    environment. Front. Microbiol. 9, 1496 (2018).\
\
63. Rihn, S. J. et al. A plasmid DNA-launched SARS-CoV-2 reverse\
\
64. Sigma-Aldrich. Citric Acid – Na2HPO4 Buffer Preparation, pH 2.6–7.6.\
    accessed 19 June 2024 [https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/life-science/](https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/life-science/)\
    core-bioreagents/biological-buffers/learning-center/bufferreference-center.html#citric.\
\
65. Mastronarde, D. N. Automated electron microscope tomography\
\
66. Hagen,W.J.H.,Wan,W.&Briggs,J.A.G.Implementationofacryoelectron tomography tilt-scheme optimized for high resolution\
    subtomogram averaging. J. Struct. Biol. 197,191–198\
    (2017).\
\
67. Eisenstein, F. et al. Parallel cryo electron tomography on in situ\
\
68. Eisenstein, F. et al. Parallel cryo electron tomography on in situ\
    lamellae. Nat. Methods 20, 131–138 (2023).\
\
69. Zheng, S. Q. et al. MotionCor2: anisotropic correction of beaminduced motion for improved cryo-electron microscopy. Nat.\
    Methods 14, 331–332 (2017).\
\
70. Kremer, J. R., Mastronarde, D. N. & McIntosh, J. R. Computer\
\
71. Kremer, J. R., Mastronarde, D. N. & McIntosh, J. R. Computer\
    visualization of three-dimensional image data using IMOD. J. Struct.\
    Biol. 116,71–76 (1996).\
\
72. Malinovska, L. et al. Proteome-wide structural changes measured\
\
73. Malinovska, L. et al. Proteome-wide structural changes measured\
    with limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry: an advanced protocol\
    for high-throughput applications. Nat. Protoc. 18, 659–682 (2023).\
\
74. Perez-Riverol, Y. et al. The PRIDE database at 20 years: 2025 update.\
\
75. Perez-Riverol, Y. et al. The PRIDE database at 20 years: 2025 update.\
    Nucleic Acids Res. 53, D543–D553 (2025).\
\
\
Acknowledgements\
This study was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant\
\
Acknowledgements\
This study was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant\
number 189939 to S.St., T.K., U.K.K., A.N.) and the UZH Candoc Grant (grant\
number FK-23-037 to I.G.). This work was further supported by a research\
grant from the Chica and Heinz Schaller Foundation (Schaller Research Group\
Leader Programme) to P.C. and by Flagship Initiative-Engineering Molecular\
Systems, Project ExU 6.1.20\_CoVLP to P.C. and L.Z. A.G.W. is supported by\
the Wellcome Trust award 303026/Z/23/Z. We thank the Center for Microscopy and Image Analysis (ZMB, UZH) and especially Nicolas Schilling,\
Johannes Riemann, and Jana Döhner for the assistance with fluorescent\
imaging. We thank the diagnostics at the IMV, UZH, and especially Gabriela\
Ziltener, Claudio Pfister, Selina Leiber, and Daniel Frei for assisting with SARS-\
CoV-2 variant isolation and sequencing. We thank the Infectious Diseases\
Imaging Platform (IDIP) at the Center for Integrative Infectious Disease\
Research Heidelberg and the cryo-EM network at Heidelberg University (HDcryoNET) for support and assistance. The authors gratefully acknowledge the\
data storage service SDS@hd supported by the Ministry of Science, Research,\
and the Arts Baden-Württemberg (MWK), the German Research Foundation\
(DFG) through grant INST 35/1314-1 FUGG and INST 35/1503-1 FUGG. We\
also thank the Functional Genomics Center Zurich (FGCZ, UZH) and especially\
Tobias Kockmann for his assistance with LiP LC-MS.\
\
Conceptualization by I.G., S.St., T.K., A.G.W., T.P., U.K.K. Methodology by\
I.G., L.Z., P.C., B.L., A.G.W. Software by B.L. Formal analysis by I.G., L.Z., M.H.\
Investigation by I.G., L.Z., B.L., M.O.P., A.G.W., E.G. Resources by S.St., P.C.,\
T.K., U.K.K., T.P., A.N. Writing—original draft preparation by I.G., L.Z., S.St.\
Writing—review editing by I.G., S.St., L.Z., P.C., T.K., N.B., M.O.P., L.K.K.,\
A.G.W., A.S., B.L., S.C.D., N.B., A.N., U.K.K., M.H., T.P. Visualization by I.G.,\
L.Z., B.L. Supervision by S.St., P.C., T.K., T.P., U.K.K. Project administration by\
S.St. Funding acquisition by S.St., P.C., T.K., T.P., U.K.K., A.N., I.G., A.G.W.\
\
The authors declare no competing interests.\
\
Peer review information Communications Biology thanks Lei Cao and the\
other anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this\
work. Primary Handling Editors: Kaliya Georgieva. A peer review file is\
available.\
\
Additional information\
Supplementary information The online version contains\
\
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to\
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.\
\
* * *\
\
[https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08514-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08514-w) Article\
\
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).\
\
© The Author(s) 2025\
\
Communications Biology \| (2025) 8:1082