The impact of heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning design features on the
transmission of viruses, including the 2019
novel coronavirus: A systematic review of
ultraviolet radiation

RESEARCH ARTICLE

1☯ 1☯ 1‡ 1‡
Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. FleckID \*, Natalie Fleck, Emily Kroeker,
1‡ 2☯
Dhyey DandnayakID, Lexuan ZhongID1, Lisa HartlingID

OPEN ACCESS

1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada,
2 Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada

Citation: Thornton GM, Fleck BA, Fleck N, Kroeker
E, Dandnayak D, Zhong L, et al. (2022) The impact
of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning design
features on the transmission of viruses, including
the 2019 novel coronavirus: A systematic review of
ultraviolet radiation. PLoS ONE 17(4): e0266487.
[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487)

Editor: Amitava Mukherjee, VIT University, INDIA

☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ NF, EK and DD also contributed equally to this work.

Received: October 30, 2021

Accepted: March 22, 2022

‡ NF, EK and DD also contributed equally to this work.

- [brian.fleck@ualberta.ca](mailto:brian.fleck@ualberta.ca)

- [brian.fleck@ualberta.ca](mailto:brian.fleck@ualberta.ca)


Copyright: © 2022 Thornton et al. This is an open
access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author and source are credited.

Abstract

Respiratory viruses are capable of transmitting via an aerosol route. Emerging evidence
suggests that SARS-CoV-2 which causes COVID-19 can be spread through airborne transmission, particularly in indoor environments with poor ventilation. Heating, ventilation, and
air conditioning (HVAC) systems can play a role in mitigating airborne virus transmission.
Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (UVGI), a feature that can be incorporated into HVAC systems, can be used to impede the ability of viruses to replicate and infect a host. We conducted a systematic review of the scientific literature examining the effectiveness of HVAC
design features in reducing virus transmission—here we report results for ultraviolet (UV)
radiation. We followed international standards for conducting systematic reviews and developed an a priori protocol. We conducted a comprehensive search to January 2021 of published and grey literature using Ovid MEDLINE, Compendex, and Web of Science Core.
Two reviewers were involved in study selection, data extraction, and risk of bias assessments. We presented study characteristics and results in evidence tables, and synthesized
results across studies narratively. We identified 32 relevant studies published between 1936
and 2020. Research demonstrates that: viruses and bacteriophages are inactivated by UV
radiation; increasing UV dose is associated with decreasing survival fraction of viruses and
bacteriophages; increasing relative humidity is associated with decreasing susceptibility to
UV radiation; UV dose and corresponding survival fraction are affected by airflow pattern,
air changes per hour, and UV device location; and UV radiation is associated with
decreased transmission in both animal and human studies. While UV radiation has been
shown to be effective in inactivating viruses and reducing disease transmission, practical
implementation of UVGI in HVAC systems needs to consider airflow patterns, air changes
per hour, and UV device location. The majority of the scientific literature is comprised of
experimental, laboratory-based studies. Further, a variety of viruses have been examined;

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or however, there are few studies of coronaviruses and none to date of SARS-CoV-2. Future preparation of the manuscript. field studies of UVGI systems could address an existing research gap and provide important **Competing interests: Dr. Fleck is an unpaid** information on system performance in real-world situations, particularly in the context of the advisor for Pura Air Inc. in Vancouver. All other current COVID-19 pandemic. This comprehensive synthesis of the scientific evidence authors have no competing interests. examining the impact of UV radiation on virus transmission can be used to guide implemen- tation of systems to mitigate airborne spread and identify priorities for future research. **Trial registration PROSPERO 2020 CRD42020193968.**

**Introduction**

COVID-19, the disease caused by a coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020 \[1\]. Since then, public health authorities world- wide have sought evidence about the route of transmission and appropriate public health mea- sures to mitigate virus spread. Certain viruses have been proven capable of transmitting via an aerosol route \[2\]. In the case of aerosol transmission, virus-laden aerosols are expelled by humans and remain airborne for extended periods of time. Emerging evidence suggests that the SARS-CoV-2 virus can spread through airborne transmission under certain circumstances, particularly in indoor environments with poor ventilation \[3, 4\]. Selecting appropriate mea- sures to protect the occupants of indoor spaces based on informed, interdisciplinary research is critical to managing the spread of infectious disease \[5\]. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems can play a role in mitigating the airborne transmission of viruses by removing or diluting contaminated air inside a building enclosure where humans breathe \[5–7\]. Many features within HVAC systems can influence transmission, such as ventilation rates, filters, humidity, and ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Under ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (UVGI), a dose of UV light is delivered to the aerosolized virus which causes damage to the DNA impeding its ability to replicate. The ability for these cells to infect a host are therefore lost \[8\]. UV radiation can be applied within mechanically ventilated spaces in the building environ- ment through in-duct or upper-room lamp fixtures. Irradiation in an enclosed space, such as in-duct UVGI, allows for better control of the UV dose, resulting in better control of particle/ pathogen exposure to UV radiation. Non-enclosed systems, such as upper-room UVGI, depend on air circulation to drive the particles/pathogens to an irradiated zone near the ceiling (designed to shield unwanted exposure of skin and eyes to UV radiation) as air moves through the UV zone generally due to air currents which are subject to room-scale turbulence. Impor- tantly, in-duct UVGI addresses virus transmission throughout the building by treating the air in the HVAC system; whereas, upper-room UVGI addresses virus transmission within one room by treating the air in that room. The use of UV radiation as a method of disinfection to help reduce the circulation and transmission of viruses has been investigated in prior research as early as the 1940s. In a narra- tive review of prevention and control measures of viral bioaerosols, Bing-Yuan \[7\] cited several studies that collectively demonstrate the effectiveness of UV in protecting humans from trans- mission of airborne viruses \[9–13\]. A more recent narrative review by Raeiszadeh and Adeli \[14\] discussed the use of UV disinfection systems for both surfaces and air in the context of COVID-19 and cites one experimental study \[15\] demonstrating inactivation of airborne coro- naviruses by UV. Both of these reviews were not systematic and do not provide a comprehen- sive synthesis of the scientific evidence examining UV radiation.

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 2 / 25

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

Even as late as 2019, the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), in their 2019 ASHRAE Handbook \[16\], recognized that despite improved UVGI system design guidance from significant advances in the analysis and model- ling of UVGI systems by Riley et al \[17\], First et al \[18\], Kowalski \[19\], and the National Insti- tute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) \[20\], no consensus guidelines exist that exhaustively address all aspects of UVGI system design. Given the potential for HVAC systems to mitigate the airborne transmission of viruses, we conducted a systematic review to comprehensively identify all relevant scientific literature and quantify the impact of HVAC design features, in particular UV radiation, on virus transmis- sion. Our objective was to examine published research evaluating the effectiveness of UVGI in reducing virus transmission. The insight drawn from this review could help answer questions of the utility of UVGI as an adjunct technology to curb the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 in mechanically ventilated indoor environments during the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, understanding effectiveness relative to technology set-up and UV dose could inform control measures. Finally, a comprehensive synthesis can identify gaps in the scientific evidence and guide future research priorities.

**Methods**

This paper describes the results of a systematic review to identify and synthesize the scientific lit- erature examining the impact of UV radiation on virus viability and transmission within the built environment. This was part of a larger research program to review the literature on HVAC design features and airborne virus transmission. Due to the volume and heterogeneity of research, results for other design features of interest (ventilation, filtration, and humidity) are reported separately. We developed an a priori protocol \[21\] that is publicly available and the sys- tematic review \[22\] is registered. We followed standards for the conduct of systematic reviews defined by the international Cochrane organization \[23\] with modifications for questions related to etiology \[24\]. We report the review according to accepted reporting standards \[25\].

## Search strategy

A research librarian (GMT) searched three electronic databases (Ovid MEDLINE, Compen- dex, Web of Science Core) from inception to June 2020 using concepts related to virus, trans- mission, and HVAC. The search strategy for Ovid MEDLINE appears in Table 1; the strategies were peer-reviewed by two librarians (TL, AH) prior to implementing the searches. The search was updated in January 2021. We screened reference lists of all relevant papers as well as rele- vant review articles. We identified conference abstracts through Compendex and Web of Sci- ence; abstracts were not included but we searched the literature to see whether any potentially relevant abstracts had been published as complete papers. We did not limit the search by year or language of publication; however, we only included English-language studies due to the vol- ume of available literature and resource constraints. References were managed in EndNote with duplicate records removed prior to screening.

## Study selection

Study selection occurred in two stages. First, two reviewers independently screened the titles and abstracts of all references identified by the electronic databases searches. Relevance of each record was classified as Yes, No or Maybe. Conflicts between Yes/Maybe and No were resolved by one reviewer. We conducted pilot testing with three sets of studies (n = 199 each) to ensure consistency among the review team. After each set of pilot screening, the review team met to discuss discrepancies and develop decision rules. The second stage involved two reviewers

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 3 / 25

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

**Table 1. Search strategy for Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL 1946 to present \[21\].**

**\# Searches** 1 exp Aerosols/ 2 Air Microbiology/ 3 exp Viruses/ 4 (aerosol or aerosols or bioaerosol or bioaerosols).mp. 5 droplet nuclei.mp. 6 infectio.mp. 7 (pathogen or pathogens).mp. 8 (virus or viruses or viral or virome).mp. 9 or/1-8 \[MeSH + Keywords–Virus concept\] 10 Air Conditioning/ 11 Air Filters/ or Filtration/ 12 Humidity/ 13 Ventilation/ 14 Ultraviolet Rays/ 15 air condition.mp. 16 (air change rate or air change rates or air changes per hour or air exchange rate or air exchange rates or air exchanges per hour).mp. 17 (airflow or air flow).mp. 18 built environment.mp. 19 computational fluid dynamics.mp. 20 ((distance adj6 index) or long distances).mp. 21 HVAC.mp. 22 (filter or filters or filtration).mp. 23 humidity.mp. 24 (ultraviolet or UV).mp. 25 ventilat.mp. 26 or/10-25 \[MeSH + Keywords–HVAC concept\] 27 Air Pollution, Indoor/ 28 exp Disease Transmission, Infectious/ 29 (indoor adj1 (air quality or environment)).mp. 30 transmission.mp. 31 or/27-30 \[MeSH + Keywords–Transmission concept\] 32 9 and 26 and 31 33 remove duplicates from 32

MeSH = Medical Subject Headings

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.t001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.t001)

independently reviewing the full text articles and applying the inclusion/exclusion criteria. Studies were classified as Include or Exclude. Conflicts between Include and Exclude were resolved by consensus of the review team. Conflicts between different exclusion reasons were resolved by one reviewer. We pilot tested the second stage of screening with three sets of stud- ies (n = 30 each). After each pilot round, the review team met to resolve discrepancies. We conducted screening using Covidence software.

## Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Table 2 lists our inclusion and exclusion criteria. As noted above, this systematic review was

part of a larger effort to examine different HVAC design features and virus transmission. We searched and screened for all design features at once, but only studies evaluating UV radiation

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 4 / 25

* * *

Table 2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria for systematic review \[21\].

| Item | Inclusion criteria | Exclusion criteria |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Agent | ·Viruses |  |
| ·Aerosols |  |  |
| ·Bioaerosols |  |  |
| ·Droplet nuclei |  |  |
| ·Other pathogens(e.g.,bacteria, fungi) |  |  |
| We planned a staged process:if we identified studies specific to viruses for each HVAC design feature,we would not include other pathogens;however,for design features where we did not find studies specific to viruses,we would expand to other pathogens. |  |  |
| HVAC | Design features relating to: |  |
| ·Ventilation(ventilation rate,air changes per hour(ACH),air exchange,airflow pattern,pressurization) |  |  |
| ·Filtration(air filtration,filter type,MERV rating,filter age and/or use,pressure drop,holding capacity,replacement,change frequency) |  |  |
| ·Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation(UVGI;power,dose,uniformity of dose,flow rate,bioaerosol inactivation efficiency,location) |  |  |
| ·Humidity or relative humidity | Examines HVAC/mechanical/or other ventilation mechanisms overall,但not by specific design features. |  |
| Setting | ·Office buildings |  |
| ·Public buildings(e.g.,schools,day cares) |  |  |
| ·Residential buildings |  |  |
| ·Hospitals and other healthcare facilities(e.g.,clinics) |  |  |
| ·Transport vehicles(e.g.,aircraft)or hubs(e.g.,airports) | ·Outdoor settings |  |
| ·Indoor settings with natural ventilation |  |  |
| Outcomes | Quantitative data evaluating the correlation or association between virus transmission and above HVAC features | Qualitative data |
| Study design | Primary research,including: |  |
| ·Epidemiological studies |  |  |
| ·Observational studies(e.g.,cohort,case-control,cross-sectional) |  |  |
| ·Experimental studies(包括human or animal) |  |  |
| ·Modelling studies,包括CFD | ·Review articles |  |
| ·Commentaries,opinion pieces |  |  |
| ·Qualitative studies |  |  |
| Language | English |  |
| We planned a staged processwhere we would include studies in languages other than English if we do not identify English language studies for specific HVAC design features or if we identified clusters of potentially relevant studies in another language. |  |  |
| Year | No restrictions |  |
| Publication status | Published,peer-reviewed | Unpublished,not peer-reviewed |

CFD = computational fluid dynamics; HVAC = heating, ventilation, and air conditioning; MERV = minimum efficiency reporting value; UVGI = ultraviolet germicidal
irradiation

For experimental studies, we assessed risk of bias based on three key domains: selection bias,
information bias and confounding \[26, 27\]. We assessed each domain as high, unclear, or low

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.t002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.t002)

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

risk of bias using signaling questions \[28\] from guidance documents for the different study types we included; e.g., animal studies, laboratory experiments, epidemiological studies \[26, 27, 29\]. For modelling studies, we assessed the following three key domains: definition (model complexity and data sources), assumption (description and explanation of model assump- tions), and validation (model validation and sensitivity analyses) \[29, 30\]. Also, we assessed each domain as high, unclear, or low risk of bias based on signaling questions \[29–31\]. The risk of bias items were pilot tested among three review authors, then two reviewers (GMT, BAF) applied the criteria independently to each relevant study and met to resolve discrepancies.

## Data extraction

We extracted general information about the study (authors, year of publication, country of corresponding author, study design) and methods (setting, population \[as applicable\], agent studied, intervention set-up). We extracted details on UV treatment parameters (where avail- able), including: wavelength; UV dose; exposure time; and fluence rate. Also, we extracted information (where available) regarding relative humidity (RH). The studies were grouped as “in-duct UVGI” and “upper-room UVGI.” We extracted quantitative data, as well as results of any tests of statistical significance related to UV features. A priori, our primary outcome of interest was quantitative measures of the association between UV radiation and virus trans- mission; however, during the review we realized that most studies focused on proxy variables such as virus survival. Therefore, we extracted data on actual transmission where available (i.e., infections), as well as proxy variables (e.g., survival fraction (SF), dose-response of UV dose and survival fraction, susceptibility (Z), and equivalent air changes per hour (ACH) due to UV radiation (ACHuv)). Survival fraction (SF) is the concentration of virus after UV expo- sure divided by the concentration of virus before UV exposure. UV dose (D) \[J/m2\] is the flu- ence rate \[W/m2\] multiplied by the exposure time \[s\]. The dose-response relationship of UV dose and survival fraction is often represented as SF = exp(-ZD), where Z is the susceptibility and exp() represents exponential function. Equivalent ACH due to UV radiation (ACHuv) is the number of air changes per hour (ACH) that would produce the same reduction in virus concentration as obtained using UV radiation. We created a data extraction form spreadsheet to ensure comprehensive and consistent capture of data. One reviewer extracted data and a second reviewer verified data for accuracy and completeness. Discrepancies were discussed by the review team.

## Data synthesis

We anticipated that meta-analysis would not be possible due to heterogeneity across studies in terms of study design, UV features examined, outcomes assessed, and reporting of results. We developed evidence tables describing the studies and their results (as reported by the authors of the primary studies). We provide a narrative synthesis of the results of relevant studies. To allow for meaningful synthesis and comparison across studies, we divided the studies into four groups: aerosolized virus, modelling, animal studies, human studies. Within the aerosolized virus group, the effect of RH was further examined.

**Results**

The electronic searches and other sources yielded 12,177 unique citations; 2,428 were identi- fied as potentially relevant based on title/abstract screening and 568 met the broader inclusion criteria (Fig 1). Of the 568, 125 were relevant to UV radiation and, of those, 32 were relevant to UV radiation and virus (Fig 1). Among the 32 relevant studies there were: 16 aerosolized virus

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 6 / 25

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

**Fig 1. Flow of studies through the selection process (note: Search was conducted for all HVAC design features but**

**only studies of UV radiation are included in this manuscript).** [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.g001)

and bacteriophage studies, 7 modelling studies, 4 animal studies, and 5 human studies. Studies were published between 1936 and 2020 (median year 2007.5). While the majority of the experi- mental and modelling studies were published between 2005 and 2020, with one exception in 1964, the human studies are all from the 1940s and the animal studies spanned from 1936 to

2020. The majority of studies were conducted in the United States (n = 24). Studies were funded by national research funding organizations (n = 13), industry (n = 6), a university and
      PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 7 / 25 state grant (n = 1), and hospital (n = 1); 2 studies reported no external funding and 8 studies
      did not report funding source.

Aerosolized virus studies

Table 3 shows that 17 viruses and five bacteriophages from 16 studies were inactivated by UV
radiation. Generally, susceptibility was determined from the dose-response relationship of UV
dose and survival fraction \[11, 13, 15, 32–34\]; however, Walker and Ko calculated susceptibility from a single dose and corresponding survival fraction \[10\], and Lin et al used both
approaches \[35\]. Some entries in Table 3 are presented as survival fraction calculated from the

Table 3. Summary of characteristics and findings for aerosolized virus and bacteriophage studies of UV treatments.

| Author(Year)Country | Infectious Agent | Treatment | Outcome Parameter | Data | Association |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Jensen(1964)\[36\]USA | Influenza A(WSN)Vaccinia virusAdenovirus(type 2)Coxsackie B1Sindbis | Wavelength:253.7nmDose:>19.4J/m2Exposure time:0.3s,0.6sRH:Influenza A at 68%RH,Vaccinia virus at 65%RH,Adenovirus at 50%RH,Coxsackie B1 at 66%RH,Sindbis at 62%RHIn-duct UVGI | Survival fraction(SF)from efficiency | Influenza A(at 68%RH)SF=0.0014at0.3sSF=0.0010at0.6sVaccinia virus(at 65%RH)SF=0.0004at0.3sSF=0.0001at0.6sAdenovirus(at 50%RH)SF=0.0869at0.3sSF=0.0312at0.6sCoxsackie B1(at 66%RH)SF=0.0240at0.3sSF=0.0005at0.6sSindbis(at 62%RH)SF=0.0327at0.3sSF=0.0047at0.6s | • Increasing exposure time(related to increasing dose)associated with decreasing survival fraction. |
| Tseng(2005)\[32\]Taiwan | MS2(ssRNA)\[15597-B1\]phiX174(ssDNA)phi6(dRNA,enveloped)T7(dsDNA) | Wavelength:253.7nmDose:<12J/m2(Figs 2 and 3,p.1140)RH:55%RH;85%RHChamber:cylinderIn-ductUVGI | Dose-response Susceptibility(Z)Effect of RH | MS2(ssRNA)Z=0.81m2/Jat 55%RHZ=0.64m2/Jat 85%RHphiX174(ssDNA)Z=0.71m2/Jat 55%RHZ=0.53m2/Jat 85%RHphi6(dsRNA)Z=0.43m2/Jat 55%RHZ=0.31m2/Jat 85%RHT7(dsDNA)Z=0.33m2/Jat 55%RHZ=0.22m2/Jat 85%RH•Z significantly lower at higher RHfor all four bacteriophages. |  |
| • ssRNA and ssDNA had increased susceptibility compared with dsRNA and dsDNA. |  |  |  |  |  |
| • ssRNA and ssDNA had greater increased susceptibility with increased RH compared with dsRNA and dsDNA. | • Increasing dose associated with decreasing survival fraction. |  |  |  |  |
| • Increasing RH associated with decreasing susceptibility. |  |  |  |  |  |
| Walker(2007)\[10\]USA | Murine hepatitis virus(MHV)coronavirus• enveloped(p.5463) | Wavelength:254 nmDose:5.99J/m2Exposure time:16.2sRH:50%RHChamber:experimental ductIn-ductUVGI | Survival fraction(SF)Susceptibility(Z)(Susceptibility calculated from survival fraction,not dose-response.) | At 50%RH,SF=0.122±0.072Z=0.377±0.119m2/J•Coronavirus had increased susceptibility compared with MS2and adenovirus. | • UV radiation associated with survival fraction. |

\\mathrm{m}^{2}/\]

\\mathrm{Z}=0.33;\\mathrm{{m m}^{2}/J}

\\mathrm{Z}0=0.22:\\mathrm{m^{2}/I}

\\mathrm{S F}=0.122\\pm0.072

\\mathrm{Z==0.377\\pm 0.119,m^{2}/I}

* * *

Table 3. (Continued)

| Author(Year)Country | Infectious Agent | Treatment | Outcome Parameter | Data | Association |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | MS2\[15597-B1\]·not enveloped(p.5463) | Wavelength:254nmDose:26.08J/m2Exposure time:16.2sRH:32%-50%RH,74%-82%RHChamber:experimental ductIn-duct UVGI | Survival fraction(SF)Susceptibility(Z)(Susceptibility calculatedfrom survival fraction,notdose-response.)Effect of RH | At32%-50%RH,SF=0.311±0.029Z=0.038±0.003m2/JAt74%-82%RH,Z=0.246±0.035Z=0.048±0.005m2/J | •Increasing RH associatedwith increasing susceptibility. |
|  | Adenovirus(serotype 2)·dsDNA(p.5463) | Wavelength:254nmDose:26.08J/m2Exposure time:16.2sRH:27%-40%RH,50%-55%RH,76%-80%RHChamber:experimental ductIn-duct UVGI | Survival fraction(SF)Susceptibility(Z)(Susceptibility calculatedfrom survival fraction,notdose-response.)Effect of RH | At27%-40%RH,SF=0.329±0.023Z=0.038±0.003m2/JAt50%-55%RH,SF=0.206±0.035Z=0.052±0.004m2/JAt76%-80%RH,SF=0.136±0.005Z=0.068±0.002m2/J | •Increasing RH associatedwith increasing susceptibility. |
| McDevitt(2007)\[11\]USA | Vaccinia virus(strain WR)·enveloped·dsDNA(p.5763) | Wavelength:254nmDose:0.1-3.2J/m2Exposure time:7.6sRH:18%-23%RH,58%-63%RH,78%-83%RHChamber:BenchtopIn-duct UVGI | Dose-responseSusceptibility(Z)Effect of RH | In SRF,at18%-23%RH,Z=6.16(4.27-8.89)m2/J;at58%-63%RH,Z=1.94(1.66-2.26)m2/J;at78%-83%RH,Z=1.63(1.14-2.32)m2/J;In water,at18%-23%RH,Z=9.48(5.32-16.90)m2/J;at58%-63%RH,Z=2.54(2.05-3.16)m2/J;at78%-83%RH,Z=1.42(1.15-1.75)m2/·Z significantly lower at higherRHafter controlling for medium。·Medium significant overall aftercontrolling for RH. | •Increasing dose associated with decreasing survivalfraction。·Increasing RH associated with decreasing susceptibility. |
| Su(2017)\[58\]USA | Fluorescentbioerosols | Safety requirement foroccupants:0.002W/m2Setting:Public elementaryschoolUpper-roomUVGI | Fluorescent bioerosolcounts(FBC) | For20 days evaluated.12days had significantly lower FBCin UVGI rooms comparedwith non-UVGI rooms,6 days hadsignificantly greater FBC in UVIGIrooms than non-UVGI rooms,and2 days were not statistically differentbetween UVGI and non-UVGIrooms. | •UV radiation associated with reduction of fluorescentbioerosols count(FBC)on12days of the20 days evaluated. |
| First(2007)\[41\];Rudnick(2007)\[42\]USA | Vaccinia virus(Western Reservestrain) | Wavelength:254nmMean Room Fluence Rate(Rudnick,2007)\[42\]0.177W/m2;0.140W/m2RH:50%RCHamber:roomUpper-roomUVGI | Survival fraction(SF)Equivalent ACH(ACHuv)Susceptibility(Z) | At0.0177W/m2 SF=0.10±0.05ACHuv=19.0ACHAt0.140W/m2 SF=0.04±0.02ACHuv=42.8ACHZ=1.0m2/FIRST(2007)\[41\]p.325;Rudnick(2007)\[42\]p.356,p.362) | •Increasing fluence rate(related to increasing dose)associated with decreasingsurvival fraction andincreasing equivalent ACH. |

26.08,\\mathrm{I/m}^{2}

\\mathsf{Z}=0.038\\pm0.003,\\mathrm{m}^{2}/J

\\mathrm{S F}=0.311\\pm0.029

\\mathrm{S F}=0.246\\pm0.035

26.08,\\mathrm{I/m}^{2}

\\mathtt{S F}=0.329\\pm0.023

\ =0.052\\pm0.004,\\mathrm{m}^{2}/J

\\mathrm{Z}=0.038\\pm0.003,\\mathrm{m}^{2}/\\mathrm{J}

\\mathrm{S F}=0.206\\pm0.035

0.1\ 3.2,{\\mathrm{J}}/{\\mathfrak{m}}^{2}

\\mathrm{S F}=0.136\\pm0.005

\\mathrm{Z}=0.068\\pm0.002,\\mathrm{m}^{2}/\\mathrm{J}

\\mathrm{m^{2}/J;}

.66{2}{2}{2}.26),\\mathrm{m}^{2}/{};,

\\left(1.15{}^{-}1.75\\right)\\mathrm{m}^{2}/\\mathrm{J}

\\mathrm{W/m^{2}}

0.140;\\mathrm{W/m}^{2}

0.0177,\\mathrm{W/m^{2}}\_{\\colon}

\\mathrm{Z}=1.0;\\mathrm{m}^{2}/\\mathrm{J}

(Continued)

\\mathrm{S F}=0.04\\pm0.02

* * *

Table 3. (Continued)

| Author (Year) Country | Infectious Agent | Treatment | Outcome Parameter | Data | Association |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| McDevitt (2008) \[12\] USA | Vaccinia virus (Western Reserve strain) | Wavelength: 254 nm Number of fixtures: 1, 4 ACH; 2, 6 ACH Condition: Winter (40% RH, fan upwards); Summer (80%RH, fan downwards) Chamber: room \[Note: same chamber as First (2007) and Rudnick (2007)\] For 6 ACH and 1 fixture, dose was 17 J/m² and was expected to be 4 times higher with 4 fixtures (p.5). Upper-room UVGI | Survival fraction (SF) Equivalent ACH (ACHuv) | For Winter, 2 ACH and 1 fixture SF = 0.017 (0.014–0.021 ACHuv = 110 (93–140) ACH For Winter, 2 ACH and 4 fixtures SF = 0.003 (0.002–0.005 ACHuv = 580 (410–830) ACH For Winter, 6 ACH and 1 fixture SF = 0.038 (0.032–0.046 ACHuv = 150 (120–180) ACH For Winter, 6 ACH and 4 fixtures SF = 0.006 (0.004–0.008 ACHuv = 1000 (740–1400) ACH For Summer, 2 ACH and 1 fixture SF = 0.087 (0.062–0.120 ACHuv = 18 (15–30) ACH For Summer, 2 ACH and 4 fixtures SF = 0.061 (0.053–0.071 ACHuv = 31 (26–36) ACH For Summer, 6 ACH and 1 fixture SF = 0.140 (0.120–0.160 ACHuv = 38 (31–46) ACH For Summer, 6 ACH and 4 fixtures SF = 0.078 (0.065–0.084 ACHuv = 71 (58–86) ACH | • Increasing number of fixtures (related to increasing dose) associated with decreasing survival fraction and increasing equivalent ACH. |
| • Increasing ACH associated with increasing survival fraction and increasing equivalent ACH. |  |  |  |  |  |
| • Comparing Winter and Summer, increasing RH and changing fan direction associated with increasing survival fraction and decreasing equivalent ACH. |  |  |  |  |  |
| Terrier (2009) \[37\] France | Influenza A (H5N2) \[A/Finch/England/2051/2021 (H2N5)\] human parainfluenza 3 (hPIV-3) Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) | Wavelength: 254 nm Chamber: experimental duct In-duct UVGI | Survival Fraction (SF) from efficiency | Influenza A (H2N5) SF = 0.0040 hPIV-3 SF = 0.0003 RSV SF = 0.0080 | • UV radiation associated with survival fraction. |
| McDevitt (2012) \[13\] USA | Influenza A (H1N1) \[A/PR/8/34 H1N1\] • RNA (p.1668) | Wavelength: 254 nm Dose: 4.9–15 J/m² RH: 25%-27%RH, 50%-54% RH, 81%-84%RH Chamber: benchtop In-duct UVGI | Dose-response Susceptibility (Z) Effect of RH | At 25%-27%RH, Z = 0.29 (0.27–0.31) m²/J At 50%-54%RH, Z = 0.27 (0.26–0.31) m²/J At 81%-84%RH, Z = 0.22 (0.21–0.23) m²/J • Z significantly lower at higher RH | • Increasing dose associated with decreasing fraction surviving. |
| • Increasing RH associated with decreasing susceptibility. |  |  |  |  |  |
| Cutler (2012) \[33\] USA | Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus (PRRSV) | Wavelength: 254 nm Dose: 0, 0.5, 1.2, 2 J/m² Exposure time: 0, 0.07, 0.14, 0.25 s RH ≤ 24%RH, 25%-79% | Dose-response Susceptibility (Z) Effect of RH | At ≥24%RH, Z = 0.425 m²/J At, 25–79%RH Z = 0.587 m²/J At ≥80%RH, | • Increasing dose associated with decreasing survival fraction. |
| • Increasing RH associated with decreasing susceptibility. |  |  |  |  |  |

17,\\mathrm{J/m^{2}}

4\\dot{9-15},{\\mathrm{m}}^{2}

Z=0.27(0.26-0.31),\\mathrm{m}^{2}/J

\\mathrm{Z==0.22,(0.21{-}0.23),\\mathrm{m}^{2}/J}

(Continued)

* * *

Table 3. (Continued)

| Author(Year)Country | Infectious Agent | Treatment | Outcome Parameter | Data | Association |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Verreault(2015)\[40\]Canada | MS2(ssRNA)\[15597-B1\]phiX174(ssDNA)phi6(dsRNA,enveloped)PR772(dsDNA) | Wavelength:254nmDose:UV sensor data not reportedExposure time:3s,6s,10sRH:20%RHChamber:rotating drum | Relative Infectious Ratio(Note:relative infectious ratio appears to be equivalent to survival fraction) | Relative infectious ratio significantly lower at higher exposure time.MS2(sRNA)greater relative infectious ratio compared with other bacteriophages. | Increasing exposure time associated with decreasing relative infectious ratio. |
| Lin(2017)\[35\]Canada | phi6•RNA(p.555) | Pulsed UVGIWavelength:200-280 nmCumulative dose:14,28,43J/m2RH:41%-58%RHChamber:cubic chamberwith 1.8m sidesUpper-room UVGI | “fast decay”SF=0.035±0.024Z=0.24m2/J“slow decay”Z=0.02m2/J | Increasing dose associated with decreasing survival fraction. |  |
| Welch(2018)\[34\]USA | Influenza A(H1N1)\[A/PR/8/34(H1N1)\] | Wavelength:222nmDose:0,8,13,20J/m2RH:55%RHChamber:BenchtopIn-ductUVGI | Dose-responseSusceptibility(Z) | Z=0.18(0.15-0.21)m2/J | Increasing dose associated with decreasing survival fraction. |
| Buonanno(2020)\[15\]USA | Coronavirus229ECoronavirusOC43229E•alpha(p.2)OC43•beta(p.2)SARS-CoV-2•beta(p.2) | Wavelength:222nmDose:0,5,10,20J/m2RH:66%RHChamber:BenchtopIn-ductUVGI | Dose-responseSusceptibility(Z) | Coronavirus229EZ=0.41(0.25-0.48)m2/JCoronavirusOC43Z=0.59(0.38-0.71)m2/J | Increasing dose associated with decreasing survival fraction. |
| Pearce-Walker(2020)\[39\]USA | MS2\[15579-B\]canine distempervirus(CDV) | Wavelength:253.7nm2 sets of 2 [lamps@0.6](mailto:lamps@0.6) W/m2RH:12%-50%RHChamber:HVAC ductIn-ductUVGI | Survival fraction(SF)from log reduction(For CDV,log reduction calculated using lower detection limit=3.16 TCID50/mL) | MS2SF=0.003CDVSF<0.03 | UV radiation associated with survival fraction. |
| Qiao(2020)\[38\]USA | Porcine respiratorycoronavirus\[VR-2384\]•alpha(p.B;p.E) | Wavelength:252.7±1nmDose:139.2,202.8,496.3J/m2Exposure time:1.25,1.81,4.44 sRH:57%-62%RHChamber:wind tunnelIn-ductUVGI | Survival fraction(SF)from efficiency(Efficiency calculated using lower detection limit=3.16 x101TCID50/mL) | SF<0.0060at139.2J/m2SF<0.0004at202.8J/m2SF<0.0002at496.3J/m2 | UV radiation associated with survival fraction. |

43,\\mathrm{J/m^{2}}

\\mathrm{Z}=0.24,\\mathrm{m}^{2}/\\mathrm{J}

^\\mathrm{,Z=0.02;m^{2}/J}

20,\\mathrm{J/m^{2}}

\\mathrm{m}^{2}

\\operatorname\*{l i m i t}=3.16,\\mathrm{T C D D}\_{50}/\\mathrm{m L}}\

\\mathrm{J//m^{2}}

Data reported as (95% confidence interval) or ± standard deviation.
ssRNA = single-stranded ribonucleic acid; ssDNA = single-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid

\\mathtt{S F<}0.0002,\\mathsf{a t},496.3,\\mathrm{J}/\\mathrm{m}^{2}

ssRNA = single-stranded ribonucleic acid; ssDNA = single-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid
dsRNA = double-stranded ribonucleic acid; dsDNA = double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid

reported efficiency \[36–38\] or the reported log reduction \[39\]. For Qiao et al \[38\] and Pearce-
Walker et al \[39\], a lower detection limit was used to calculate the reported efficiency and log
reduction, respectively. For Verreault et al, the reported relative infectious ratio appears to be

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.t003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.t003)

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

**Fig 2. UV radiation susceptibility (Z) and relative humidity (RH).**

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.g002)

equivalent to survival fraction; however, associations are presented with respect to relative infectious ratio \[40\]. For 3 studies, UV radiation was associated with survival fraction \[37–39\]. Increasing UV dose was associated with decreasing survival fraction for 10 viruses and five bacteriophages from 12 studies. Increasing UV dose was associated with decreasing survival fraction where the dose-response relationship was used to calculate susceptibility for seven studies (Table 3) \[11, 13, 15, 32–35\]. Additionally, UV dose was associated with decreasing sur- vival fraction where dose varied by exposure time \[36, 40\], number of UV fixtures \[12\], and fluence rate \[41, 42\]. Increasing RH was associated with decreasing susceptibility in four studies \[11, 13, 32, 33\] for a variety of infectious agents including viruses (Influenza A, Vaccinia virus, PRRSV) and bacteriophages (MS2, phiX174, phi6, T7) (Fig 2). Cutler et al reported that PRRSV susceptibil- ity was significantly lower at 80%RH compared with 25%RH-79%RH \[33\]. In addition, four studies that report susceptibility at one RH are included in Fig 2 \[10, 15, 34, 35\] where three viruses were coronaviruses (murine hepatitis virus (MHV) coronavirus, human coronavirus 229E, human coronavirus OC43). Considering the findings for influenza A \[13, 34\] and coro- naviruses \[10, 15\], UV radiation inactivated these enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses and increasing UV dose was associated with decreasing survival fraction characterized by the sus- ceptibility. If enveloped, single-stranded RNA animal viruses behave like influenza A (Fig 2), then increasing RH may be associated with decreasing susceptibility to UV radiation of coro- navirus. The design of the UV radiation in an HVAC system should consider the reported

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 12 / 25 coronavirus susceptibility recognizing that two are dose-response \[15\] and one is single dose
\[10\] (Table 3).
Bacteriophage MS2 showed a discrepancy where Tseng and Li found that increasing RH

Bacteriophage MS2 showed a discrepancy where Tseng and Li found that increasing RH
was associated with decreasing susceptibility \[32\] and Walker and Ko found that increasing
RH was associated with increasing susceptibility \[10\]. Walker and Ko acknowledged that this
relationship for bacteriophages (MS2) and animal viruses (adenovirus) was different from that
reported previously for bacteria \[10\]. Other differences between the two studies of bacteriophage MS2 include the susceptibility calculation and suspending medium. Susceptibility was
calculated using dose-response of UV dose and survival fraction by Tseng and Li \[32\] and
using a single dose and survival faction by Walker and Ko \[10\]. Deionized water was used by
Tseng and Li \[32\] and phosphate buffered saline with 0.01% Tween 80 and Antifoam A was
used by Walker and Ko \[10\].
Three studies examined upper-room UVGI using a room-sized chamber \[12, 41, 42\].

Three studies examined upper-room UVGI using a room-sized chamber \[12, 41, 42\].
McDevitt et al examined the effect of summer conditions (80% RH and fan directing air downwards) and winter conditions (40%RH and fan directing air upwards) on survival of vaccinia
virus, in addition to number of fixtures and ACH for upper-room UVGI \[12\]. Comparing
winter and summer conditions, increasing RH and changing fan direction were associated
with increasing survival fraction and decreasing equivalent ACH. Overall, increasing RH was
associated with increasing survival fraction, decreasing susceptibility and decreasing equivalent ACH. These findings suggest that the design of UV radiation in an upper-room UVGI system should consider the typical variation of indoor relative humidity throughout the year.

Modelling studies

In the experimental study by McDevitt et al increasing ACH was associated with increasing
survival fraction \[12\]. Two modelling studies confirmed the association of increasing ACH
and increasing survival fraction (Table 4) \[43, 44\]. Increasing ACH is associated with increasing survival fraction because the increased ACH decreases the time that the infectious agent is

Table 4. Summary of characteristics and findings for modelling studies of UV treatments.

| Author(Year)Country | Infectious Agent | Model | Outcome Parameter | Data | Association |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Noakes(2006)\[47\]UK | Infectious agents sensitive to UV radiation including viruses | UV device and ventilation configurationSetting: single patient hospital roomCFD modelUpper-room UVGI | UV dose distributionVolume average UV dosewhere volume could be room, upper-room or lower-room | Higher average UV dose in the occupied region of the room when ventilated air supplied at floor and extracted at ceiling compared with supplied at ceiling and extracted at floor. UV dose less affected by UV device location when ventilated air supplied at floor and extracted at ceiling compared with supplied at ceiling and extracted at floor. | UV dose affected by airflow pattern. UV dose affected by UV device location. |
| First(2007)\[41\];Rudnick(2007)\[42\]USA | Vaccinia virus(Western Reserve strain) | Wavelength:254nmMean Room Fluence Rate(Rudnick,2007\[42\])0.0177W/m2;0.140W/m2RH:50%RHTwo box modelUpper-room UVGI | Survival fraction(SF)Effectiveness index(EI)which considers vertical mixing and UV radiation | At0.0177W/m2,SF=0.10EI=18.2At0.140W/m2,SF=0.04EI=36.4 | Survival fraction(SF)proportional to Effectiveness index(EI)to the-0.74 power.Increasing fluence rate(related to increasing dose)associated with decreasing survival fraction and increasing EI. |

0.140;\\mathrm{W/m^{2}}

0.0177,\\mathrm{W/m^{2};}

(Continued)

* * *

Table 4. (Continued)

| Author(Year)Country | Infectious Agent | Model | Outcome Parameter | Data | Association |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Li(2010)\[43\]South Korea | Infectious agents sensitive to UV radiation including viruses | UV device configuration:wall,cornerFluence rate:0,59,118,236m2/ventilation:0,3,6ACH evaluatedZ=0.039m2/\[p.51\]Setting:hospital isolation roomCFD modelUpper-roomUVGI | Survival fraction(SF)from efficiency(removal SFequalsUV radiation SFplus ventilationSF) | •Removal SF lower when UV on wall compared with corner•Removal SF lower with increasing fluence rate•Removal SF lower with increasing ACH•Contraction SF lower with increasing ACH•UV radiation SF greater with increasing ACH | •UV dose and survival fraction affected by UV device location.•Increasing fluence rate(related to increasing dose)associated with decreasing removal survival fraction.•Increasing ACH associated with increasing UV radiation survival fraction.•Increasing ACH associated with decreasing removal survival fraction and decreasing ventilation survival fraction. |
| Sung(2011)\[45\]Japan | Influenza | UV device configurationEvaluatedZ=0.27m2/for influenzaA(p.2328)\[seeMcDevitt(2012)\[13\]\]Setting:four patient hospital roomCFD modelUpper-roomUVGI | UV dose distributionSurvival fraction(SF) | •In breathing zone of neighbouring patient,SF=0.26-0.52•Highest UV dose and lowest survival fraction when upper-roomUVGI installed on opposite side of the one exhaust opening. | UV dose affected by UV device location. |
| Zheng(2016)\[48\]USA/China | Influenza | UVGI equivalent air changes per hourACHuv=12ACHSIER epidemic model and contact network modelUVGI on cruise ship | Attack rate=Number of new cases in population at risk dividedby number of persons at risk in population | Attack rate decreased 87.8%withUVGI compared with baseline(noUV):4.08% compared with 33.42% | UV radiation associated with decreased attack rate(related to number of cases). |
| Firrantello(2018)\[46\]USA | Rhinovirus | Coil face:2W/m2Allowable minimum:0.50W/m2EvaluatedZ=0.022996m2/for virus(p.604)Parametric model ofenergy,indoor air quality(IAQ),economic benefitsUVGI of coiling coil(induct UVGI) | IAQ benefit:Work Loss Days(WLD);Hospital Acquired Infections(HAI);DisabilityAdjusted Life Years(DALY) | “The estimated monetary IAQ benefit from collateral air treatment of aUVGI coil irradiation system treatment was much greater than the estimated energy cost savings.”(p.609) | UV radiation of coils associated with monetary indoor air quality benefit related to absence,infection,or disability. |
| Buchan(2020)\[44\]UK | Coronavirus | Wavelength:222nmEvaluatedZ=0.41m2/for coronavirus(Buonanno,2020\[15\])(p.2)Setting:single patient hospital roomCoupled radiation-CFDmodelUpper-roomUVGI | Survival fraction(SF) | At0.8ACH,SF=0.15At8ACH,SF=0.43 | Increasing ACH associated with increasing survival fraction. |

\\mathrm{Z}=0.02996,\\mathrm{m}^{2}/\\mathrm{J}

CFD = computational fluid dynamics
SEIR = susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered

SEIR = susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered

\\mathrm{Z=0.41;m^{2}/J}

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

exposed to UV radiation. Li et al considered the removal survival fraction which was the sum of the survival fraction attributed to UV radiation and the survival fraction attributed to venti- lation \[43\]. Increasing ACH was associated with decreasing removal survival fraction and decreasing ventilation survival fraction despite an increasing UV radiation survival fraction. The relationship between ACH and UV radiation is an important design consideration. Susceptibility (Z), like those calculated in the aerosolized virus studies, are important input parameters in modelling studies \[43–45\]. Three modelling studies used computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models (Table 4) to investigate the association of UV device location and UV dose and/or survival fraction. Li et al found that the survival fraction was decreased when the UV devices were located at the ceiling in the centre of the four walls compared with at the four corners \[43\]. Sung and Kato found that the highest UV dose and lowest survival fraction were associated with the UV device being located opposite the one exhaust \[45\]. Noakes et al found that UV dose was less affected by which one of the four UV devices was active when ventilated air was supplied at the floor and extracted at the ceiling compared with when ventilated air was supplied at the ceiling and extracted at the floor \[47\]. Furthermore, UV dose was associated with airflow pattern. Noakes et al found a higher average UV dose in the occupied region of the room when ventilated air was supplied at the floor and extracted at the ceiling compared with when ventilated air was supplied at the ceiling and extracted at the floor \[47\]. The modelling of upper-room UVGI confirmed that designs must consider airflow pattern \[47\], ACH \[43, 44\], and UV device location \[43, 45, 47\]. UV radiation was associated with decreased attack rate which is the number of new cases in population at risk divided by number of persons at risk in population. Zheng et al found that attack rate decreased 87.8% when UVGI was modelled on a cruise ship where the ACH due to UV was 12 ACH \[48\].

## Animal and human studies

As early as 1936, UV radiation was associated with decreased influenza transmission in an ani- mal model (Table 5) \[49\]. UV radiation was associated with decreased virus transmission and infection incidence in three of the animal studies \[49–51\]. Dee et al acknowledged that the lack of effect was likely due to insufficient exposure time to the UV radiation \[52\]. All of the five human studies were from the 1940s and investigated upper-room UVGI (Table 6) \[53–57\]. UV radiation was associated with decreased transmission of respiratory infections in three studies \[53, 55, 56\]. In the studies of barracks, Wheeler et al found that high intensity UV treatment was required to decrease transmission \[53\]. UV radiation was associ- ated with modified spread of transmission, but not prevention of transmission, of measles \[54\] and chickenpox \[57\], but not mumps \[57\].

## Risk of bias

The risk of bias evaluation for the experimental studies demonstrated three scenarios. Seven- teen studies had low risk of bias for all three domains: selection bias, information bias, con- founding. Seven studies had low risk of bias for selection bias and confounding but unclear risk of bias for information bias due to lack of clarity in the description of the UV radiation \[36, 37, 39, 40, 49, 52, 56\]. Of these seven studies, four were aerosolized virus studies \[36, 37, 39, 40\], two were animal studies \[49, 52\], and one was a human study \[56\]. One aerosolized virus study had low risk of bias for selection bias but high risk of bias for information bias and confounding due to lack of calibration of fluorescent bioaerosol count (FBC) and potential for UV radiation to affect fluorescence \[58\]. Su et al cite other studies where FBC and cultures pro- vided a predictable functional relationship which could be seen as a calibration of this

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 15 / 25

* * *

Table 5. Summary of characteristics and findings for animal studies of UV treatments.

| Author(Year)Country | Infectious Agent | Treatment | Outcome Parameter | Data | Association |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Wells(1936)\[49\]USA | Influenza\[Puerto Rico8\] | Dose:UV light intensity previous“marked bactericidal effect”(p.412)Setting:virus aerosolizing and animal exposure chamber;treatment tubeIn-duct UVGI | TransmissionAir from UV groupand non-UV groupinoculated intranasally. | Transmission in0 of 2 ferrets inUV groupand2 of 2 ferrets innon-UV group. | UV radiation associated with decreased transmission. |
| Jakab(1982)\[50\]USA | InfluenzaA\[Mouse-adapted influenzaA/PR8/34\] | Dose:4.2,8.4,12.6J/m2\*Setting:virus aerosolizing chamber;treatment slot;animal exposure chamberIn-duct UVGI | Transmission | 9% mortality of mice in highest dose UV group compared with100% mortality of mice in non-UV group. | ·UV radiation associated with decreased mortality. |
| ·Increasing UV dose associated with decreasing mortality. |  |  |  |  |  |
| Dee(2006)\[52\]USA | Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus(PRRSV) | Wavelength:253.7nmSetting:virus aerosolizing chamber;treatment duct;animal exposure chamberIn-duct UVGI | Transmission | Transmission in8 of 10 pigs in UV groupnot statistically different than transmission in9 of 10 pigs in non-UV group likely due to insufficient exposure time(p.32). | UV radiation did not have a statistically significant effect on transmission likely due to insufficient exposure time(related to UV dose). |
| Jaynes(2020)\[51\]USA | Upper respiratory tract infections(URI) | Dose:designed to eliminate99% of influenza,feline calcivirus,and bacteriaB bronchiseptica(p.930)Setting:Kitten nurseryUpper-room UVGI | Incidence of URI | Incidence of URI significantly decreased87.1% with UVGI in2018 compared with no UVGI in2016:1.6 cases per 100 kitten admissions compared with12.4cases per 100 kitten admissions. | UV radiation associated with decreased incidence of upper respiratory tract infections. |

4.2,8.4,12.6,\\mathrm{{J}}/{\\mathrm{{m}}}^{2,\*}

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.t005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487.t005)

This systematic review identified two main thrusts of research in this field: (1) research that
focused on the effect of UV radiation on aerosolized virus survival and (2) research that considered some or all of the transmission chain from infected host to aerosolized virus to infected
target where specific UV radiation configurations or scenarios were evaluated. The results
revealed several important findings. First, viruses and bacteriophages were inactivated by UV
radiation. Second, increasing UV dose was associated with decreasing survival fraction of
viruses and bacteriophages. Third, increasing relative humidity was associated with decreasing
susceptibility to UV radiation. Fourth, UV dose and corresponding survival fraction were
affected by airflow pattern, ACH, and UV device location. Finally, UV radiation was associated
with decreased transmission in both animal and human studies. While some of these findings
may be well-established in the UV / technical literature, the value of this review is in bringing

Discussion

* * *

Table 6. Summary of characteristics and findings for human studies of UV treatments.

| Author(Year)Country | Infectious Agent | Treatment | Outcome Parameter | Data | Association |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Wheeler(1945)\[53\]USA | Respiratory Infections | Naval Training Centre BarracksHigh intensity:235 W UV energy per dormitoryLow intensity—121 W UV energy per dormitoryUpper-room UVGI and floor UVGI | TransmissionMean number of admissions for respiratory illness per company | High Intensity-Non-UV:12.4UV:9.3Cases in UV group significantly lower than cases in non-UV groupLow Intensity-Non-UV:11.4UV:11.3Cases in UV group not statistically different than cases in non-UV group | •UV radiation associated with decreased transmission with high intensity UV treatment. |
| •UV radiation not associated with altered transmission with low intensity UV treatment. |  |  |  |  |  |
| Perkins(1947)\[54\]USA | Measles virus | Face level of standing pupil:0.002-0.005 W/m2Upper-room air:0.11-0.22 W/m2School with UV and non-UV roomsUpper-room UVGI | TransmissionDays for onset of middle 80% of cases | Non-UV:17 daysUV:24 daysProtracted spread in UV rooms and explosive spread in non-UV rooms. | UV radiation associated with modified spread of transmission for measles. |
| Higgons(1947)\[55\]USA | Respiratory Infections | UVGI system equivalent to at least 100 ACHWavelength:253.7 nmHospital children's wingUpper-room UVGI | TransmissionNumber of children febrile from respiratory disease | Non-UV:3.98% of children in three-year control periodUV:2.38% of children febrile in three-year treatment periodDifference not attributed to chance | UV radiation associated with decreased transmission. |
| Langmuir(1948)\[56\]USA | Respiratory Infections | Naval Training Centre BarracksUpper-room UVGI and floor UVGIPre-pandemicPandemic(Influenza A)Post-pandemic | TransmissionMean incidence rates per 1,000 per week of febrile respiratory diseases | Pre-pandemic-Non-UV:9.5UV:4.9Pandemic-Non-UV:85.6UV:69.6Post-pandemic-Non-UV:19.1UV:16.7Pre-pandemic difference not attributed to chance. | UV radiation associated with decreased transmission. |
| Bahlke(1949)\[57\]USA | ChickenpoxMumps | Face level of standing pupil:0.002-0.005 W/m2Upper-room air:0.11-0.22 W/m2School with UV and non-UV roomsUpper-room UVGI\[Note:Same methods as Perkins(1947)\] | TransmissionDays for onset of middle 80% of cases | ChickenpoxNon-UV:49 daysUV:78 daysMumpsNon-UV:53 daysUV:54 daysExplosive spread not observed in UV rooms. | •UV radiation associated with modified spread of transmission for chickenpox. |
| •UV radiation not associated with modified spread of transmission for mumps. |  |  |  |  |  |

\\mathsf{W}/\\mathrm{m}^{2}

UV inactivation of airborne viruses is governed by the UV dose. The required dose varies
depending on the type of virus, capsid structures, and host cell repair mechanisms \[59\]. Tseng
and Li found that dsRNA and dsDNA viruses required a dose that was 2 times higher than
their single strand counterparts for 90% inactivation \[32\]. Walker and Ko came to a similar conclusion when they found that adenovirus was more resistant to inactivation compared to
SARS \[10\]. This resistance is attributed to the double stranded nature of its DNA genome and
its ability to shield or consume UV radiation using small proteins concentrated along with
viral particles \[59\].
External factors such as ventilation and relative humidity also play an important role in UV

viral particles \[59\].
External factors such as ventilation and relative humidity also play an important role in UV
effectiveness. Relative humidity is uniquely intertwined with UV inactivation. Many studies in
this systematic review indicate that relative humidity has a marked, sometimes statistically significant effect on UV inactivation \[10–13, 33\]. Further research must be done to ascertain the
interaction of relative humidity and UV inactivation in a real-world context with a diverse list
of infectious agents. The effect of ventilation on UV effectiveness is similarly complex. Increasing ventilation rate and UVGI are inversely related. At a higher ventilation rate infectious
agents are removed from the space at a faster pace. This results in shorter exposure times
thereby decreasing the effectiveness of the UVGI system \[41\]. Dee et al stated that in their
experiments UVC provided no reduction in aerosol transmission of PRRSV due to insufficient
exposure time \[52\]. McDevitt et al argued that the combination of increased ventilation and
upper room UVC is “more than merely additive” \[12(p5)\]. The overall effect of a higher ventilation rate results in an increase in the ACHuv (effective ventilation due to UVC). Li et al came
to a similar conclusion that while UV disinfection efficiency decreases when ventilation rate
increases, the overall infectious agent removal rate increases \[43\]. In addition to ventilation
rates, airflow patterns can have a meaningful impact on UVGI effectiveness \[47\]. Well mixed
air allows UVGI to be more effective \[12, 41, 47\]. UVGI systems should be designed specifically for the targeted space. Ventilation rate, airflow patterns, and relative humidity should all
be taken into consideration. In spaces with no ventilation systems or where increasing the ventilation rate would not be feasible, UVGI can provide cost effective air disinfection \[8\]. Spaces
with a low outdoor air fraction can also benefit by adopting UVGI \[50\]. When considering
upper room UVGI, lamp placement can have a significant impact on the effectiveness of the
inactivation \[47\]. UV devices set on a wall rather than the corners of the room improves the
effectiveness of the UVGI system \[43\]. Building owners and operators should consult an expert
when examining the feasibility of installing UVGI in their space. First et al states that “upperroom UVGI must be approached as a carefully interdependent system with critical interactions
among luminaire selection, luminaire placement, and all aspects of a ventilation system” \[41\
(p328)\].
When investigating the effectiveness of UVGI it is important to carefully consider the viral

(p328)\].
When investigating the effectiveness of UVGI it is important to carefully consider the viral
challenge and ensure the experiment mimics natural conditions. Even though Jensen used
viral aerosol concentrations that were “many times greater than one would normally expect to

viral aerosol concentrations that were “many times greater than one would normally expect to
encounter under natural conditions”, they stated that UVGI used in conjunction with filtration “should kill virtually all viruses” \[36(p420)\]. Walker and Ko discussed the importance of

tion “should kill virtually all viruses” \[36(p420)\]. Walker and Ko discussed the importance of
aerosolization, sampling, and medium \[10\]. Some viruses might be inactivated in the act of

tion “should kill virtually all viruses” \[36(p420)\]. Walker and Ko discussed the importance of
aerosolization, sampling, and medium \[10\]. Some viruses might be inactivated in the act of

aerosolization, sampling, and medium \[10\]. Some viruses might be inactivated in the act of
aerosolization or sampling; a medium with a high protein concentration might protect the targeted virus from inactivation \[10\]. UV susceptibility in liquid suspensions cannot be substituted for susceptibility in aerosols. Walker and Ko found that for the viruses they tested, UV

tuted for susceptibility in aerosols. Walker and Ko found that for the viruses they tested, UV
susceptibility was higher in aerosols than in liquid suspensions \[10\]. Attenuated strains of
infectious agents can be used as a safer alternative to the actual virus as they are expected to
closely mimic the behaviour of the actual viruses compared to an alternative surrogate \[39\].

tuted for susceptibility in aerosols. Walker and Ko found that for the viruses they tested, UV
susceptibility was higher in aerosols than in liquid suspensions \[10\]. Attenuated strains of
infectious agents can be used as a safer alternative to the actual virus as they are expected to
closely mimic the behaviour of the actual viruses compared to an alternative surrogate \[39\].

closely mimic the behaviour of the actual viruses compared to an alternative surrogate \[39\].
With regards to safety, Welch et al \[34\] and Buonanno et al \[15\] have proposed the use of far

With regards to safety, Welch et al \[34\] and Buonanno et al \[15\] have proposed the use of far
UVC (222 nm) as a safer alternative to conventional UVGI (254 nm). It was demonstrated that
far UVC has a similar inactivation efficiency to conventional UVGI for aerosolized coronavirus while not appearing to be cytotoxic to human cells and tissues in vitro or in vivo \[15, 60\].

With regards to safety, Welch et al \[34\] and Buonanno et al \[15\] have proposed the use of far
UVC (222 nm) as a safer alternative to conventional UVGI (254 nm). It was demonstrated that
far UVC has a similar inactivation efficiency to conventional UVGI for aerosolized coronavirus while not appearing to be cytotoxic to human cells and tissues in vitro or in vivo \[15, 60\].

* * *

Airborne transmission of respiratory pathogens is a serious issue. Like improving filtration
and increasing ventilation, UVGI is a passive mitigation measure that can have an important
impact on virus transmission. No responsibility is placed on the individuals in the space. Langmuir et al suggests that upper room UVGI by itself is not an adequate method of air disinfection \[56\]. A well designed UVGI system should work in conjunction with other mitigation
measures such as adequate filtration and ventilation \[36, 43, 44, 47, 51\]. Perkins \[54\] and
Bahlke \[57\] found that even in the event of an outbreak, the use of UVGI led to low grade protracted epidemics of measles and chickenpox respectively, as opposed to large explosive episodes. The effectiveness of UVGI has been known for a long time. The benefits of a welldesigned UVGI system outweigh the principal and maintenance costs \[55\]. The time has come
for UVGI to be considered as essential as ventilation and filtration.

Implications for practice

The design of the UVGI for implementation in a building environment, whether in-duct or
upper-room, should consider which virus is targeted. An additional consideration is how the
susceptibility of that virus is affected by changes in relative humidity (Fig 2). If more than one
infectious agent is targeted, then a range of susceptibilities should be considered. Jaynes et al
designed their UVGI system to target one bacteria and two viruses (Table 5) \[51\]. Practical
application of UVGI systems should take into account lessons learned from modelling studies;
i.e. UV dose produced by the UV system may be affected by the airflow pattern, ACH and UV
device location \[43–45, 47\].
Generally, in-duct UVGI can be used to prevent in-building transmission when ventilation

device location \[43–45, 47\].
Generally, in-duct UVGI can be used to prevent in-building transmission when ventilation
supply air has some fraction which is recycled, a practice which is a common means to reduce
heating/cooling costs. Also, in-duct UVGI could be incorporated into a ducted air purification
system which exhausts back into the source space directly and might be a tool used to remove
airborne virus in a space at a rate higher than could be achieved by the building air handling
system alone. In both of these cases the survival of pathogen after UV exposure would need to
be extremely low for them to be effective (though in practice in-duct systems would generally
operate in series with aerosol removal by filtration). A consensus on an acceptable standard
for virus reduction due to UV treatment might be helpful. Experimental studies may benefit
from using the ASHRAE Standard 52.2 test duct which has been used in recent filtration studies \[61, 62\]. Simply seeing more studies recognize that UV radiation dose is dependent on the
radiant flux, which is often not uniform, shows a positive trend. For ducted systems, flow that
is well-mixed and close to uniform in velocity profile is helpful in evenly dosing aerosols with
UV.
Upper-room UVGI is specifically designed to reduce the buildup of pathogens in the shared

Two experimental studies \[15, 34\] and one modelling study \[44\] investigated the effects of
far-UVC light (222 nm) on virus survival as an alternative to conventional UVC light sources.
Viruses used included human coronaviruses alpha HCoV-229E and beta HVCo-OC43 \[15\],
SARS-CoV-2 \[44\], and Influenza A (H1N1) \[34\]. While conventional UV has been shown to
reduce virus survival fractions, conventional UV can be carcinogenic and cataractogenic \[34,\
44\] and a health hazard when exposed directly \[15\]. Far-UVC light has been posited as an
option for UV radiation as, since far-UVC light has a lower range “of less than a few micrometers, and thus it cannot reach living human cells in the skin or eyes,” the range is still greater

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

than that of viruses, allowing UVC light to “penetrate and kill them” \[15(p1)\]. Given concerns of ozone generating by 185nm UV, Welch et al measured O3 concentration and could not detect ozone with their 5ppb threshold of detection \[34\]. We did not specifically evaluate potential adverse effects resulting from application of UVGI systems; however, these are well-known in UV / technical literature. The ASHRAE Handbook provides an overview of safety considerations for UV within HVAC applications \[16\]. Upper-room UVGI presents greater potential for adverse effects than in-duct systems. In all cases, applications should follow manufacturer instructions for installation, safety measures (e.g., warning posters, safety switches) and regular maintenance.

## Implications for research

We identified several key gaps in the existing scientific evidence examining the impact of UV on virus stability and transmission. The majority of studies involved experimental, laboratory- based evaluations. Moreover, there were few field studies or evaluations of real-world applica- tions. There were few studies examining the effect of UV on coronaviruses and we found no studies of SARS-CoV-2. This will be an important gap to address in future research given that the most concerning outbreaks in the past 20 years have involved coronaviruses. Nevertheless, the consistency of results across the existing studies is encouraging in terms of the ability of UV to impact the stability and transmission of a range of viruses, including those similar in structure to coronaviruses (i.e., influenza is similar in structure being a lipid-enveloped single- stranded RNA virus). Studies characterized as in-duct UVGI are designed with mechanically induced air flow with a controlled mean velocity which transports air through an irradiated zone inside a duct. In-duct UVGI lends itself to greater experimental control of the UV dose than the upper-room UVGI, although laminar duct flow, non-uniform velocity profiles, and radiation distribution always lead to some dose variance for in-duct systems. Also, in-duct configurations tend to simulate practical conditions where UVGI is installed in HVAC systems or air purifiers. Non- enclosed systems like upper-room UVGI depend on air circulation to drive the particles to an irradiated zone near the ceiling and does not require a controlled mean velocity: air moves through the UV zone generally due to air currents which are subject to room-scale turbulence. Thus their evaluation becomes more complex, needing to take into account ventilation config- urations, air currents and lamp installation locations. Future research must ensure that UV dose and UV design requirements are clearly described within the context of each study in order to simplify comparison between studies. A common metric used for quantifying the effects of UV on airborne pathogens was the measure of the survival fraction, comparing a quantity before and after the UV intervention. This met- ric is easy to understand but is highly dependent on the configuration of the system for expos- ing the aerosol to UV radiation. It shows how a system in its entirety kills or inactivates the pathogen in question, but does not isolate the more fundamental dose-response as the suscep- tibility (Z) measure, which is the exponent or linear slope on a semi-log Cartesian plot of the UV dose versus survival fraction. An encouraging and important trend evident in this body of work is the general evolution toward more rigorous control of experimental conditions which lend themselves to clear quantification of dose-response. Knowing that not all UV sources are alike, and that flux divergence, reflection, air velocity profile and lack of turbulence can lead to non-uniform UV radiation of aerosols allows researchers to focus on comparing susceptibility

(Z) values, a single parameter. In some cases, the UV radiation and aerosolized virus studies were able to provide the mechanistic quantitative measure of susceptibility (Z) which is useful for cross study comparisons and is an important input parameter in modelling studies.
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 20 / 25

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ultraviolet radiation and virus transmission in the built environment

In addition to research examining the effect of UV radiation on aerosolized virus survival, the other main focus was research considering some or all of the transmission chain from infected host to aerosolized virus to infected target under specific UV radiation conditions. These results tend to be somewhat anecdotal because there is no standard test for the full trans- mission chain between two or more people sharing breathing space in the built environment. This is a common challenge in many fields of research. There would be value if the community moved to a more standardized test case configuration such as a standard room and ventilation system configuration, so that discrepancies attributable to factors such as geometry and flow field could be eliminated. The ASHRAE 185.1 standard states “Test standards form the foun- dation for air-cleaner selection in the ventilation industry. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) literature states that the most important need in the area of ultraviolet germi- cidal irradiation (UVGI) is industry standards to rate installed devices” \[63(p2)\]. All human studies of upper-room UVGI that we identified were field studies conducted between 1945–1949. In a historical review, Reed indicates that UVGI fell out of favour after the 1940s due to inconsistent UV effects on measles transmission in schools, which were later attributed to measles exposure outside of schools \[64\]. Additionally, no human studies on virus transmission and UV radiation were found after the 1940s which is a time period before vaccinations for measles \[65\], chickenpox \[66\], and mumps \[67\]. Reed attributes more recent attention on UVGI to bacteria, tuberculosis, and viruses, influenza and SARS \[64\]. In the cur- rent review, recent studies of UVGI are modelling studies in hospital settings from 2006 to 2020 in which influenza (2011) and coronavirus (2020) were considered. More field studies of upper-room UVGI are warranted to advance our understanding of its applicability.

**Conclusion**

This review provides a comprehensive and rigorous synthesis of the existing scientific litera- ture examining the effectiveness of UV radiation and virus survival and transmission. Experi- mental studies of UV radiation have consistently demonstrated high susceptibility of viruses (or simulant agents) with sufficient UV dose. This research underscores the value and impor- tance of UVGI applications to inactivate viruses and mitigate disease transmission. While sev- eral studies demonstrated effectiveness of UVGI for coronaviruses, the UV susceptibility of aerosolized SARS-CoV-2 specifically has yet to be reported. There are few studies examining the effect of UV radiation outside laboratory or simulated settings. Further, future field studies of real-world implementations of UVGI need to take into account the various factors that exist within ventilated indoor spaces that may modify UV effectiveness, including humidity, airflow pattern, air changes per hour, and UV device location. Research is needed to provide evidence of the effect of UV radiation along the chain of transmission in non-simulated “real life” set- tings, particularly in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as well as regular sea- sonal disease outbreaks.

## Supporting information

## S1 Checklist. PRISMA 2009 checklist.

(DOC)

**Acknowledgments**

We thank Tara Landry and Alison Henry for conducting the peer review of the search strate- gies. We thank Samuel Ducholke, Kristen Rumbold, Larry Zhong, and Stella Mathews for their involvement in screening studies for inclusion.

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266487) April 8, 2022 21 / 25

* * *

Author Contributions

Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Lisa Hartling.
Data curation: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Natalie Fleck, Emily Kroeker, Dhyey Dandnayak, Lisa Hartling.
Formal analysis: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Natalie Fleck, Emily Kroeker, Dhyey
Dandnayak, Lisa Hartling.
Funding acquisition: Brian A. Fleck, Lexuan Zhong, Lisa Hartling.
Investigation: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Natalie Fleck, Emily Kroeker, Dhyey Dandnayak, Lisa Hartling.
Methodology: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Lisa Hartling.
Project administration: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Lisa Hartling.
Supervision: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Lisa Hartling.
Validation: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck.
Visualization: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Natalie Fleck, Emily Kroeker, Dhyey Dandnayak, Lisa Hartling.
Writing – original draft: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Natalie Fleck, Emily Kroeker,
Dhyey Dandnayak, Lisa Hartling.
Writing – review & editing: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Natalie Fleck, Emily Kroeker,

Writing – review & editing: Gail M. Thornton, Brian A. Fleck, Natalie Fleck, Emily Kroeker,
Dhyey Dandnayak, Lexuan Zhong, Lisa Hartling.

References

01. World Health Organization (WHO). WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing on
    COVID-19–11 March 2020. [https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/who-directorgeneral-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19—11-march-2020](https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/who-directorgeneral-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19%E2%80%9411-march-2020). Accessed 4 April
03. Leung NHL. Transmissibility and transmission of respiratory viruses. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2021. https://
    doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00535-6 PMID: 33753932
04. Noorimotlagh Z, Jaafarzadeh N, Martinez SS, Mirzaee SA. A systematic review of possible airborne
    transmission of the COVID-19 virus (SARS-CoV-2) in the indoor air environment. Environ Res. 2021;
    193:110612. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110612](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110612) PMID: 33309820
05. Rahimi NR, Fouladi-Fard R, Aali R, Shahryari A, Rezaali M, Ghafouri Y, et al. Bidirectional association
    between COVID-19 and the environment: a systematic review. Environ Res. 2021; 194:110692. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110692 PMID: 33385384
06. Luongo JC, Fennelly KP, Keen JA, Zhai ZJ, Jones BW, Miller SL. Role of mechanical ventilation in the
    airborne transmission of infectious agents in buildings. Indoor Air. 2016; 26:666–678. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1111/ina.12267 PMID: 26562748
07. Li Y, Leung GM, Tang JW, Yang X, Chao CYH, Lin JZ, et al. Role of ventilation in airborne transmission
    of infectious agents in the build environment–a multidisciplinary systematic review. Indoor Air. 2007;
    17:2–18. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2006.00445.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2006.00445.x) PMID: 17257148
08. Bing-Yuan Zhang Y-H, Leung NHL Cowling BJ, Yang Z-F. Role of viral bioaerosols in nosocomial infections and measures for prevention and control. J Aerosol Sci. 2018; 117:200–211. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1016/j.jaerosci.2017.11.011 PMID: 32226118
09. Brickner PW, Vincent RL, First M, Nardell E, Murray M, Kaufman W. The Application of Ultraviolet Germicidal Irradiation to Control Transmission of Airborne Disease: Bioterrorism Countermeasure. Public
    Health Rep. 2003; 118(2):99–114. [https://doi.org/10.1093/phr/118.2.99](https://doi.org/10.1093/phr/118.2.99) PMID: 12690064
10. Scarpino P. V., Jensen N. J., Jensen P. A., & Ward R. (1998). The use of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (UVGI) in disinfection of airborne bacteria and rhino-viruses. J Aerosol Sci. 29(Suppl.1):S777–
    S778.

* * *

10. Walker CM, Ko G. Effect of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation on viral aerosols. Environmental Sci Technol. 2007; 41(15):5460–5465. [https://doi.org/10.1021/es070056u](https://doi.org/10.1021/es070056u) PMID: 17822117
11. McDevitt JJ, Lai KM, Rudnick SN, Houseman EA, First MW, Milton DK. Characterization of UVC light
    sensitivity of vaccinia virus. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007; 73(18):5760–5766. [https://doi.org/10.1128/](https://doi.org/10.1128/)
    AEM.00110-07 PMID: 17644645
12. McDevitt JJ, Milton DK, Rudnick SN, First MW. Inactivation of Poxviruses by Upper-Room UVC Light in
    a Simulated Hospital Room Environment. PLoS ONE. 2008; 3(9):1–7. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal).
    pone.0003186 PMID: 18781204
13. McDevitt JJ, Rudnick SN, Radonovich LJ. Aerosol susceptibility of influenza virus to UV-C light. Appl
    Environ Microbiol. 2012; 78(6):1666–1669. [https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.06960-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.06960-11) PMID: 22226954
14. Raeiszadeh M, Adeli B. A Critical Review on Ultraviolet Disinfection Systems against COVID-19 Outbreak: Applicability, Validation, and Safety Considerations. ACS Photonics. 2020; 7(11):2941–2951.
    [https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.0c01245](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.0c01245)
15. Buonanno M, Welch D, Shuryak I, Brenner DJ. Far-UVC light (222 nm) efficiently and safely inactivates
    airborne human coronaviruses. Sci Rep. 2020; 10(1):1–8. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56847-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56847-4)
    PMID: 31913322
16. ASHRAE. Chapter 62. Ultraviolet Air and Surface Treatment. In: 2019 ASHRAE Handbook: HVAC
    Applications. Atlanta: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers;
18. Riley RL, Knight M, Middlebrook G. Ultraviolet susceptibility of BCG and virulent tubercle bacilli. Am
    Rev Respir Dis. 1976; 113(4):413–418. [https://doi.org/10.1164/arrd.1976.113.4.413](https://doi.org/10.1164/arrd.1976.113.4.413) PMID: 817628
19. First MW, Nardell EA, Chaisson W, Riley R. Guidelines for the Application of Upper-Room Germicidal
    Irradiation for preventing Transmission of Airborne Contagion—Part I: Basic Principles. ASHRAE
    Trans. 1999; 105:869–876.
20. Kowalski WJ. Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation handbook: UVGI for air and surface disinfection. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 2009.
21. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). Environmental control for tuberculosis:
    Basic upper-room ultraviolet germicidal irradiation guidelines for healthcare settings. March 2009.
    NIOSH Publication 2009–105. [https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2009-105/](https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2009-105/) Accessed April 12, 2021
22. Thornton GM, Fleck BA, Zhong L, Hartling L. The impact of heating, ventilation and air conditioning
    (HVAC) design features on the transmission of viruses, including the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-
    19): protocol for a systematic review and environmental scan. Open Science Framework. 2020. https://
    doi.org/https%3A//doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/Y62V7
23. Thornton G, Zhong L, Fleck B, Hartling L. The impact of heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC)
    design features on the transmission of viruses, including the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19): a systematic review. PROSPERO. 08 July 2020. [https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display\_record.php](https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php)?
    ID=CRD42020193968 Accessed July 8, 2020
24. Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page MJ, et al. Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions version 6.0. Updated July 2019. Cochrane. Available from [www.training](http://www.training/).
    cochrane.org/handbook.
25. Moola S, Munn Z, Sears K, et al. Conducting systematic reviews of association (etiology): The Joanna
    Briggs Institute’s approach. Int J Evid Based Healthc. 2015; 13(3):163–169. [https://doi.org/10.1097/](https://doi.org/10.1097/)
    XEB.0000000000000064 PMID: 26262566
26. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman D G. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and metaanalyses: the PRISMA statement. BMJ. 2009; 339:b2535. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b2535](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b2535) PMID:
    19622551
27. Williams-Nguyen J, Bueno I, Sargeant JM, Nault AJ, Singer RS. What is the evidence that point sources
    of anthropogenic effluent increase antibiotic resistance in the environment? Protocol for a systematic
    review. Anim Health Res Rev. 2016; 17(1):9–15. [https://doi.org/10.1017/S1466252316000037](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1466252316000037) PMID:
    27427189
28. Office of Health Assessment and Translation (OHAT), Division of the National Toxicology Program,
    National Institute of Environment Health Sciences. Handbook for conducting a literature-based health
    assessment using OHAT approach for systematic review and evidence integration. National Toxicology
    Program, US Department of Health and Human Services, 4 March 2019. [https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/](https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/)
    ohat/pubs/handbookmarch2019\_508.pdf Accessed November 28, 2020.
29. Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page MJ, et al. (editors). Cochrane Handbook
    for Systematic Reviews of Interventions version 6.2. Updated February 2021. Cochrane. Available from
    [www.training.cochrane.org/handbook](http://www.training.cochrane.org/handbook)

* * *

29. Samuel GO, Hoffmann S, Wright RA, et al. Guidance on assessing the methodological and reporting
    quality of toxicologically relevant studies: A scoping review. Environ Int. 2016; 92–93:630–646. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2016.03.010 PMID: 27039952
30. Mateus ALP, Otete HE, Beck CR, Dolan GP, Nguyen-Van-Tam JS. Effectiveness of travel restrictions
    in the rapid containment of human influenza: a systematic review. Bull World Health Organ. 2014; 92
    (12):868–880D. [https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.14.135590](https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.14.135590) PMID: 25552771
31. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Guidance Document on the Validation of (Quantitative) Structure-Activity Relationship \[(Q)SAR\] Models. OECD Series on Testing and
    Assessment No. 69, OEC D Publishing, 3 September 2014. [https://doi.org/https%3A//doi.org/10.1787/](https://doi.org/https%3A//doi.org/10.1787/)
    9789264085442-en Accessed January 4, 2021.
32. Tseng CC, Li CS. Inactivation of virus-containing aerosols by ultraviolet germicidal irradiation. Aerosol
    Sci Technol. 2005; 39(12):1136–1142. [https://doi.org/10.1080/02786820500428575](https://doi.org/10.1080/02786820500428575)
33. Cutler TD, Wang C, Hoff SJ, Zimmerman JJ. Effect of temperature and relative humidity on ultraviolet
    (UV254) inactivation of airborne porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome virus. Vet Microbiol.
    2012; 159(1–2):47–52. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.03.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.03.044) PMID: 22542268
34. Welch D, Buonanno M, Grilj V, et al. Far-UVC light: A new took to control the spread of airborne-mediated microbial diseases. Sci Rep. 2018; 8(1):1–7. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-17765-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-17765-5) PMID:
    29311619
35. Lin WE, Guo Q, Savory E, Mubareka S, Steinhoff A, Scott JA. Pulsed ultraviolet light decontamination
    of virus-laden airstreams. Aerosol Sci Technol. 2017; 51(5):554–564. [https://doi.org/10.1080/](https://doi.org/10.1080/)
    02786826.2017.1280128
36. Jensen MM. Inactivation of Airborne Viruses by Ultraviolet Irradiation. Appl Microbiol. 1964; 12:418–
37. [https://doi.org/10.1128/am.12.5.418-420.1964](https://doi.org/10.1128/am.12.5.418-420.1964) PMID: 14215971
38. Terrier O, Essere B, Yver M, et al. Cold oxygen plasma technology efficiency against different airborne
    respiratory viruses. J Clin Virol. 2009; 45(2):119–124. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2009.03.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2009.03.017) PMID:
    19406687
39. Qiao Y, Yang M, Marabella IA, et al. Greater than 3-Log reduction in viable coronavirus aerosol concentration in ducted ultraviolet-c (UV-C) systems. Environ Sci Technol. 2020. [https://doi.org/10.1021/acs](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs).
    est.0c05763 PMID: 33263988
40. Pearce-Walker JI, Troup DJ, Ives R, et al. Investigation of the effects of an ultraviolet germicidal irradiation system on concentrations of aerosolized surrogates for common veterinary pathogens. Am J Vet
    Res. 2020; 81(6):506–513. [https://doi.org/10.2460/ajvr.81.6.506](https://doi.org/10.2460/ajvr.81.6.506) PMID: 32436797
41. Verreault D, Marcoux-Voiselle M, Turgeon N, Moineau S, Duchaine C. Resistance of aerosolzied bacterial viruses to relative humidity and temperature. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015; 81(20):7305–7311.
    [https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02484-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02484-15) PMID: 26253683
42. First M, Rudnick SN, Banahan KF, Vincent RL, Brickner PW. Fundamental factors affecting upperroom ultraviolet germicidal irradiation–part I. Experimental. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2007; 4(5):321–331.
    [https://doi.org/10.1080/15459620701271693](https://doi.org/10.1080/15459620701271693) PMID: 17365506
43. Rudnick SN, First MW. Fundamental factors affecting upper-room ultraviolet germicidal irradiation–part
    II. Predicting effectiveness. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2007; 4(5):352–362. [https://doi.org/10.1080/](https://doi.org/10.1080/)
    15459620701298167 PMID: 17454503
44. Li C, Deng B, Kim CN. Simulations to determine the disinfection efficiency of supplementary UV light
    devices in a ventilated hospital isolation room. Indoor Built Environ. 2010; 19(1):48–56. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
    10.1177/1420326X09358019
45. Buchan AG, Yang L, Atkinson KD. Predicting airborne coronavirus inactivation by far-UVC in populated
    rooms using a high-fidelity coupled radiation-CFD model. Sci Rep. 2020; 10(1):1–7. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1038/s41598-019-56847-4 PMID: 31913322
46. Sung M, Kato S. Estimating the germicidal effect of upper-room UVGI system on exhaled air of patients
    based on ventilation efficiency. Build Environ. 2011; 46(11):2326–2332. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j](https://doi.org/10.1016/j).
    buildenv.2011.05.015 PMID: 32288012
47. Firrantello J, Bahnfleth W. Field measurement and modeling of UVC cooling coil irradiation for heating,
    ventilating, and air conditioning energy use reduction (RP-1738)-Part 2: Enegry, indoor air quality, and
    economic modeling. Sci Technol Built Environ. 2018; 24(6):600–611. [https://doi.org/10.1080/](https://doi.org/10.1080/)
    23744731.2017.1383821
48. Noakes CJ, Sleigh PA, Fletcher LA, Beggs CB. Use of CFD modelling to optimize the design of upperroom UVGI disinfection systems for ventilated rooms. Indoor Built Environ. 15(4);347–356. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1177/1420326X06067353

* * *

48. Zheng L, Chen Q, Xu J, Wu F. Evaluation of intervention measures for respiratory disease transmission
    on cruise ships. Indoor Built Environ. 2016; 25(8):1267–1278. [https://doi.org/10.1177/](https://doi.org/10.1177/)
    1420326X15600041
49. Wells WF, Brown HW. Recovery of influenza virus suspended in air and its destruction by ultraviolet
    radiation. Am J Epidemiol. 1936; 24(2):407–413. [https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a118273](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a118273)
50. Jakab GJ, Knight ME. Decreased influenza virus pathogenesis by infection with germicidal UV-irradiated airborne virus. Environ Int. 1982; 8(1):415–418. [https://doi.org/10.1016/0160-4120(82)90059-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/0160-4120(82)90059-9)
51. Jaynes RA, Thompson MC, Kennedy MA. Effect of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation of the air on the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections in kittens in a nursery. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2020; 257
    (9):929–932. [https://doi.org/10.2460/javma.257.9.929](https://doi.org/10.2460/javma.257.9.929) PMID: 33064607
52. Dee SA, Batista L, Deen J, Pijoan C. Evaluation of systems for reducing the transmission of Porcine
    reproductive and respiratory syndrome by aerosol. Can J Vet Res. 2006; 70(1):28–33. PMID:
    16548329
53. Wheeler SM. Ultra-violet light control of air-borne infections in a naval training center. Am J Public
    Health. 1945; 35:457–468. [https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.35.5.457](https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.35.5.457) PMID: 18016162
54. Perkins JR. Effects of ultra-violet irradiation of classrooms on spread of measles in large rural central
    schools. Am J Public Health. 1947; 37:529–537. [https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.37.5.529](https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.37.5.529)
55. Higgons RA, Hyde GM. Effect of ultraviolet air sterilization upon incidence of respiratory infections in a
    children’s institution: a 6-year study. N Y State J Med. 1947: 47(7):707–710. PMID: 20293122
56. Langmuir AD, Jarrett ET, Hollaender A. Studies of the control of acute respiratory diseases among
    naval recruits: III. The epidemiological pattern and the effect of ultraviolet irradiation during the winter of
    1946–1947. Am J Epidemiol. 1948; 48(2):240–251. [https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a119239](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a119239)
    PMID: 18885749
57. Bahlke AM. Effect of ultra-violet irradiation of classrooms on spread of mumps and chickenpox in large
    rural central schools—A progress report. Am J Public Health. 1949; 39:1321–1331 [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    2105/ajph.39.10.1321 PMID: 18141127
58. Su C, Lau J, Yu F. A case study of upper-room UVGI in densely-occupied elementary classrooms by
    real-time fluorescent bioaerosol measurements. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017; 14(1). https://
    doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14010051 PMID: 28075352
59. Thurston-Enriquez JA, Haas CN, Jacangelo J, Riley K, Gerba CP. Inactivation of feline calicivirus and
    adenovirus type 40 by UV radiation. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003; 69(1):577–582. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1128/AEM.69.1.577-582.2003 PMID: 12514044
60. Buonanno M, Ponnaiya B, Welch D, et al. Germicidal Efficacy and Mammalian Skin Safety of 222-nm
    UV Light. Radiat Res. 2017; 187(4):483–491. [https://doi.org/10.1667/RR0010CC.1](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR0010CC.1) PMID: 28225654
61. Zhang J, Huntley D, Fox A, Gerhardt B, Vatine A, Cherne J. Study of viral filtration performance of residential HVAC filters. ASHRAE J. 2020;1–6.
62. Vyskocil JM, Le´ tourneau V, St–Germain MW, Turgeon JG, Duchaine C. Challenge of mechanical and
    antimicrobial filters against infectious phages artificially agglomerated with inorganic dust with a known
    particle-size distribution. Aerosol Sci Technol. 2021; 55(2):194–204. [https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826](https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826).
    2020.1834073
63. ASHRAE. ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 185.1–2020 Method of Testing UV-C Lights for Use in Air-Handling
    Units or Air Ducts to Inactivate Airborne Microorganisms. Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating,
    Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers; 2020.
64. Reed NG. The history of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation for air disinfection. Public Health Rep. 125
    (1):15–27. [https://doi.org/10.1177/003335491012500105](https://doi.org/10.1177/003335491012500105) PMID: 20402193
65. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Measles history. Updated 5 November 2020.
    [https://www.cdc.gov/measles/about/history.html](https://www.cdc.gov/measles/about/history.html). Accessed March 10, 2021.
66. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Chickenpox vaccination: What everyone should
    know. Updated 7 August 2019. [https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/varicella/public/index.html](https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/varicella/public/index.html).
    Accessed March 10, 2021.
67. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Mumps vaccination. Updated 8 March 2021.
    [https://www.cdc.gov/mumps/vaccination.html](https://www.cdc.gov/mumps/vaccination.html). Accessed March 10, 2021.