Airborne transmission risks of tuberculosis
and COVID-19 in schools in South Africa,
Switzerland, and Tanzania: Modeling of
environmental data

RESEARCH ARTICLE

1☯ 1☯ 2,3
Nicolas BanholzerID, Remo SchmutzID, Keren MiddelkoopID, Jerry HellaID4,
1,5,6 2,3
Matthias EggerID, Robin Wood, Lukas FennerID1\*

OPEN ACCESS

Citation: Banholzer N, Schmutz R, Middelkoop K,
Hella J, Egger M, Wood R, et al. (2024) Airborne
transmission risks of tuberculosis and COVID-19 in
schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania:
Modeling of environmental data. PLOS Glob Public
Health 4(1): e0002800. [https://doi.org/10.1371/](https://doi.org/10.1371/)
journal.pgph.0002800

1 Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2 Institute of Infectious
Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 3 Desmond Tutu
Health Centre, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 4 Ifakara Health
Institute, Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, 5 Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology & Research, School of
Public Health & Family Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 6 Population Health
Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom

Received: June 7, 2023

Editor: Flavio Finger, Epicentre MSF,
SWITZERLAND

Funding: Grants from the Multidisciplinary Center
for Infectious Diseases of the University of Bern
and the Rudolf Geigy Foundation in Basel,
Switzerland, partially supported the data collection.
NB, RS, and LF are supported by the National

Accepted: December 18, 2023

☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.

- [lukas.fenner@unibe.ch](mailto:lukas.fenner@unibe.ch)

- [lukas.fenner@unibe.ch](mailto:lukas.fenner@unibe.ch)


The COVID-19 pandemic renewed interest in airborne transmission of respiratory infections, particularly in congregate indoor settings, such as schools. We modeled transmission
risks of tuberculosis (caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mtb) and COVID-19 (caused
by SARS-CoV-2) in South African, Swiss and Tanzanian secondary schools. We estimated
the risks of infection with the Wells-Riley equation, expressed as the median with 2.5% and
97.5% quantiles (credible interval \[CrI\]), based on the ventilation rate and the duration of
exposure to infectious doses (so-called quanta). We computed the air change rate (ventilation) using carbon dioxide (CO2) as a tracer gas and modeled the quanta generation rate
based on reported estimates from the literature. The share of infectious students in the
classroom is determined by country-specific estimates of pulmonary TB. For SARS-CoV-2,
the number of infectious students was estimated based on excess mortality to mitigate the
bias from country-specific reporting and testing. Average CO2 concentration (parts per million \[ppm\]) was 1,610 ppm in South Africa, 1,757 ppm in Switzerland, and 648 ppm in Tanzania. The annual risk of infection for Mtb was 22.1% (interquartile range \[IQR\] 2.7%-
89.5%) in South Africa, 0.7% (IQR 0.1%-6.4%) in Switzerland, and 0.5% (IQR 0.0%-3.9%)
in Tanzania. For SARS-CoV-2, the monthly risk of infection was 6.8% (IQR 0.8%-43.8%) in
South Africa, 1.2% (IQR 0.1%-8.8%) in Switzerland, and 0.9% (IQR 0.1%-6.6%) in Tanzania. The differences in transmission risks primarily reflect a higher incidence of SARS-CoV-
2 and particularly prevalence of TB in South Africa, but also higher air change rates due to
better natural ventilation of the classrooms in Tanzania. Global comparisons of the modeled
risk of infectious disease transmission in classrooms can provide high-level information for
policy-making regarding appropriate infection control strategies.

Abstract

(\\mathrm{C O}{}\_{2})

\\mathrm{c O}\_{2}

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Airborne transmission in schools in Africa and Switzerland

Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) **Introduction** through grant no. 5U01-AI069924-05, and ME is supported by special project funding (grant no.Increasing evidence underscores the role of airborne transmission in respiratory infections 174281) from the Swiss National Science like SARS-CoV-2 \[1–5\], which has been affirmed by institutions such as the Centers for Dis- Foundation.ease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization \[6, 7\]. Airborne transmission

**Competing interests: The authors have declared** can occur when an infectious person exhales infectious respiratory particles into the air, which that no competing interests exist. enter a susceptible person’s respiratory tract after inhalation of these particles from contami- nated air. Pathogens are predominantly found in smaller particles <5 μm \[8\], which can remain in the air for several hours, travel further, and reach deeper into the respiratory tract \[2\]. Current understandings of airborne transmission of respiratory infections emanate from the groundwork in tuberculosis (TB) research \[9\]. Caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium _tuberculosis (Mtb), TB is a strictly airborne infection \[8\] and was the leading cause of death_ globally for any infectious disease until the COVID-19 pandemic. Airborne transmission of respiratory infections (including Mtb and SARS-CoV-2) is more likely in indoor settings such as healthcare facilities, restaurants, offices, and schools \[10\]. School closures were most intensely debated during the COVID-19 pandemic because it was unclear how much they affected community and household transmission \[11–13\]. Infection control measures could mitigate transmission risks \[12, 14, 15\] and allow schools to remain open. In particular, previous studies have shown that the risk of indoor transmission decreases with mechanical ventilation (i.e., a mechanical ventilation system that circulates fresh air) and natural ventilation (i.e., by opening win- dows and doors) \[16–19\], which replace contaminated indoor air with fresh outdoor air. The ventila- tion (or replacement) rate can be monitored using indoor carbon dioxide (CO2) as a tracer gas \[20\]. Ventilation rate is an important parameter in modeling the risk of airborne infection \[15, 21–23\]. This study estimated and compared the transmission risk of SARS-CoV-2 and Mtb between three secondary schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania. We used indoor CO2 measurements from different schools in each country over prolonged periods. We estimated the risk of infection during school hours using the Wells-Riley equation \[24\], as modified by Rudnick and Milton \[25\], by making assumptions about the generated rate of infectious doses and the proportion of contagious students in the classroom.

**Methods**

## Environmental, infrastructure and room occupancy

An overview of the data used in this study is presented in Table 1. Our study is primarily based on data collected in secondary schools in Cape Town (South Africa, age 15–19 years) \[22\], the canton of Solothurn (Switzerland, age 15–19 years) \[26\], and Dar-es-Salaam (Tanzania, age 15–19 years) \[21\]. None of the schools used mechanical ventilation to ventilate classrooms. Instead, classrooms in South Africa and Switzerland were ventilated through opening windows and in Tanzania through constant outdoor air exchange (no windows). Room occupancy var- ied between schools, with 30 students in South Africa, 20 in Switzerland, and 50 in Tanzania. We filtered the CO2 data collected in each school according to the times students occupied the rooms (excluding lessons outside rooms, breaks, and school-free hours).

## Statistical analyses and modeling

We used the Wells-Riley equation as modified by Rudnick and Milton \[25\] to model the risk of airborne transmission for Mtb and SARS-CoV-2. The risk of infection P (in %) is estimated as f Iqt _D_ _P ¼_ ¼ 1 exp\*;\* _S n_

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800) January 18, 2024 2 / 17

* * *

Table 1. Overview of study setting and collected data.

|  | South Africa | Switzerland | Tanzania |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Location | Cape Town | Canton of Solothurn | Dar-es-Salaam |
| Year | 2013 | 2023 | 2015 |
| Volume of classrooms(m3)，vol | 180 | 233 | 162 |
| Number of students(average)，n | 30 | 20 | 50 |
| Age of students(range) | 15-19 | 13-15 | 15-19 |
| CO2(ppm)，C |  |  |  |
| Mean，overall | 1,610 | 1,757 | 648 |
| Mean(SD)，daily mean | 1,421(451) | 1,702(370) | 600(58) |
| Mean(SD)，daily max | 2,728(1,131) | 2,373(539) | 951(587) |
| Ventilation rate(Ls-1)，Q |  |  |  |
| Mean(SD)，daily maxC | 2.47(1.81) | 2.29(0.88) | 12.36(7.46) |
| Air change rate(h-1)，ACH |  |  |  |
| Mean(SD)，daily maxC | 1.48(1.08) | 0.71(0.27) | 13.74(8.29) |
| Rebreathed air fraction(%)，f |  |  |  |
| Mean，overallC | 3.8 | 4.3 | 0.8 |
| Mean(SD)，daily meanC | 3.2(1.4) | 4.1(1.2) | 0.6(0.2) |
| Sampling duration and frequency | 91 days during a school year | 35 days over 7 weeks(Jan-Mar) | 5 days over 2 weeks(Jul) |
| Sampling setting | Several schools and classrooms | One school and several classrooms | Four schools and classrooms |
| Reference | Richardson et al.\[22\] | Banholzer et al.\[26\] | Hella et al.\[21\] |

(\\mathrm{m}^{3}).

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

CO2, carbon dioxide; IQR, interquartile range; ppm, parts per minute; SD, standard deviation

\\mathrm{C{ _}_{2},}

where D is the number of diseased cases, S is the number of susceptibles, f is the time-weighted
average fraction of rebreathed air (in %), I is the number of infectious students; n is the total
number of students in the room, q is the rate of infectious doses (quanta) generated by infec-
-1
tious individuals (in quanta h), and t is the duration of exposure (in h). We computed the
O a
average rebreathed air fraction as f ¼ ðC C Þ=C using the average of the indoor CO2 meao
surements (C in parts per million \[ppm\]) and assuming a CO2 level of C = 400 ppm in the outa
door air \[20, 22, 27–30\] as well as C = 31,500 ppm in the exhaled air \[25, 31\].
-1 o
In addition, we computed the ventilation rate (in L s per individual) as Q ¼ G=ðC C Þ

\\mathrm{h}^{-1}

C^{a}=31,500

\\bar{f}=(big\\bar{C}-C^{0}\\big)/C^{a}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

-1 o
In addition, we computed the ventilation rate (in L s per individual) as Q ¼ G=ðC C Þ
-1
and the air change rate (in air changes h) as ACH ¼ ð3; 600 Q nÞ=V using the the daily
maximum of the CO2 measurements C as the steady-state levels \[20\]. We assumed a CO2 gen-
6 a
eration rate of G ¼ 1=ð60 10 Þ b C ¼ 0:0042 L/s per individual in a lecture classroom
\[31\] as well as a breathing rate of b = 8 L/min per individual \[25\]. Of note, the time points and
classrooms of the CO2 levels collected in South Africa and Tanzania were usually unknown.
Therefore, the daily maximum CO2 levels C were determined with a quantile-based approach
−1
by evaluating the inverse of the empirical distribution function F (y) in South Africa cSA¼
1 1
FSAðyCHÞ and Tanzania cTZ¼ FTZðyCHÞ at the quantiles of the daily maxima in Switzerland
yCH¼ FCHðcCHÞ.
We estimated the annual risk of transmission for Mtb and the monthly risk for SARS-CoVyear month
2\. We assumed t = 919 and t = 919/12 = 77 school-hours, corresponding to the OECD

\\mathfrak{s},Q=G/\\big(\\check{C}-C^{o}\\big)

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

;A C H=(3,600\\cdot Q\\cdot n)/V\\cdot

\ {mathrm C O}\_{2}

:G=1/(60\\cdot10^{6})\\cdot b\\cdot C^{a}=0.0042L

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

F\_{S A}^{-1}\\big(y\_{C H}\\big)

q

q

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Airborne transmission in schools in Africa and Switzerland

results with boxplots showing the median, interquartile range (IQR or 50%-credible interval \[CrI\]), and 95%-CrI. We performed all analyses with R software (version 4.2.2).

## Modeling assumptions

**Infectious quanta.** The range of estimates for the quanta generation rate q is large for both SARS-CoV-2 and Mtb \[33–38\]. There are two approaches to estimating q. One approach is to solve the Wells-Riley equation for q using data on the number of susceptible and diseased cases \[35–38\]. Another more recently developed approach is to predict q from the viral or bac- terial load in sputum \[34\] using the equation

_q ¼ cv_ c _i_ IR V _d;_

where c _v_ is the viral or bacillay load (RNA copies mL -1 or CFU mL -1 ), c _i_ is a conversion factor (quanta RNA copies -1 or quanta CFU -1 ), IR is the inhalation rate (m3 h -1 ), and V _d_ is the droplet volume concentration expelled by the infectious person (mL m3). The product of IR×V _d_ is the droplet emission rate. We applied the predictive approach using the viral load distributions and conversion fac- tors for SARS-CoV-2 and Mtb as reported by Mikszewski et al. for the original SARS-CoV-2 strain and untreated TB patients \[33\]. We assumed the IR of a sitting person \[39\] and used the droplet emission rate of a loud-speaking person \[40\] to estimate the droplet emission rates for other activity levels by assuming the relative V _d_ for breathing, speaking, and loud speaking \[41\]. We considered three scenarios for the time-weighted quanta generation rates in the class- room: low (70% breathing, 25% speaking, 5% loud speaking), medium (50% breathing, 40% speaking, 10% loud speaking), and high activity (30% breathing, 50% speaking, 20% loud speaking). The quanta generation rates corresponding to these scenarios are shown in Table 2.

**Table 2. Modeling assumption for the quanta generation rate. The quanta generation rates q are derived using the**

approach of Buonanno et al., which predicts q from sputum viral load. Viral loads and conversion factors for SARS- CoV-2 and Mtb are taken from Table 1 in Mikszewski et al. \[33\]. The droplet emission rates were recalculated based on values reported by Mikszewski et al. using the inhalation rate of a sitting person \[39\] for all activity levels. The activity- specific quanta generation rates were weighted by the proportion of time each activity occurs in the classroom. Three scenarios were considered: low (70% breathing, 25% speaking, 5% loud speaking), medium (50% breathing, 40% speak- ing, 10% loud speaking), and high activity (30% breathing, 50% speaking, 20% loud speaking). **SARS-CoV-2 Mtb** Viral/bacillary load, log10 cVmean (SD) 5.6 (1.2) RNA copies mL -1

5.5 (1.3) CFU mL
-1 Conversion factor, ci1.4 × 10 −3 quanta RNA copies -1

2.0×10 −3 quanta CFU
-1 Droplet emission rate (mL h -1 ), IR×V _d_, Breathing 3.18×10 −2 _same as for SARS-CoV-2_ Speaking 1.04×10 −3 Loud speaking 4.39×10 −3 Quanta generation rate (quanta h -1 ), q median (IQR) by activity level Breathing 0.6 (0.1–3.7) 0.7 (0.1–4.9) Speaking 2.4 (0.4–15.7) 2.8 (0.4–20.9) Loud speaking 17.8 (2.8–114.8) 20.2 (2.7–151.9) Quanta generation rate (quanta h -1 ), q median (IQR) for different scenarios Low activity 1.0 (0.1–6.8) 1.1 (0.1–9.1) Medium activity 1.4 (0.2–10.5) 1.6 (0.2–13.9) High activity 2.3 (0.3–18.0) 2.6 (0.3–23.3)

_Mtb, Mycobacterium tuberculosis; SD, standard deviation; IR, inhalation rate (m3_ h -1 ); V _d_ droplet volume concentration (mL m -3 ); IQR, interquartile range

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.t002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.t002)

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800) January 18, 2024 4 / 17

* * *

Table 3. Modeling assumptions for infectious diseases incidence. Estimated prevalence (cases per 100,000 people) of Mtb in the young (age group of the 15 to 24-yearolds) and the general population \[42–44\]. Estimated incidence (new cases per 100,000 people) of SARS-CoV-2 using a consistent approach (see Methods) based on estimates of excess mortality \[47\] and time-updated, country-specifc infection-fatality ratios \[48\]. Reported incidence (new cases per 100,000 people) of SARS-CoV-2 in the
young age group of the 10 to 20-year-olds) of Switzerland \[51\] and in the general population of South Africa \[50\] and Switzerland \[51\]. Incidence of SARS-CoV-2 in Tanzania is not shown because it has barely been reported \[45, 46\].

| Infectious disease(Median\[95%-CrI\]) | South Africa | Switzerland | Tanzania |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Mtb |  |  |  |
| Estimated prevalence |  |  |  |
| Age group 15-24y | 432(232-632) | 12(5-20) | 42(11-73) |
| General population | 852(679-1,026) | 57(44-70) | 293(228-358) |
| Infectious students,I |  |  |  |
| Age group 15-24y | 0.130(0.071-0.189) | 0.002(0.001-0.004) | 0.021(0.006-0.037) |
| General population | 0.256(0.203-0.308) | 0.011(0.009-0.014) | 0.147(0.114-0.179) |
| SARS-CoV-2 |  |  |  |
| Estimated Incidence |  |  |  |
| IFR-based approach | 1,557(474-9,156) | 360(105-4,570) | 928(362-11,731) |
| Reported incidence |  |  |  |
| Age group 10-20y |  | 31(2-754) |  |
| General population | 24(0-190) | 84(4-1,713) |  |
| Infectious students,I |  |  |  |
| IFR-based approach | 0.474(0.143-2.730) | 0.054(0.013-0.111) | 0.486(0.297-1.157) |
| Age group 10-20y |  | 0.006(0.000-0.151) |  |
| General population | 0.007(0.000-0.057) | 0.017(0.001-0.343) |  |

Mtb, Mycobacterium tuberculosis; CrI, credible

They are roughly consistent with estimates from the literature \[33–38\]. For example, our
-1
medium scenario for Mtb assumes a q = 1.6 quanta h (interquartile range 0.2 to 13.9), which
-1-1
covers the lower q = 0.27 quanta h and upper q = 5.69 quanta h reported by Andrews et al.
\[35\] as well as other estimates from studies using the Wells-Riley approach to estimate q (S1
Table).
Infectious cases. For Mtb, we calculated the number of infectious students in each class-

q=1.6;\ \ \\mathrm{q u a n t a,h}^{-1}

q!=!0.27

\\mathbf{h}^{-1}

q!=!5.69

\\mathrm{h}^{-1}

Table).
Infectious cases. For Mtb, we calculated the number of infectious students in each classroom from country-specific estimates of the prevalence of bacteriologically confirmed pulmonary TB in the 15–24 age group (Table 3). Estimates for Tanzania and South Africa were based
on two national prevalence surveys conducted between 2011 and 2012 and between 2017 and
2019, respectively \[42, 43\]. We modeled the prevalence in these countries with a Normal distribution using the reported mean estimates and confidence intervals. Because a national prevalence survey was not available for Switzerland, we approximated the prevalence using the
number of new TB notifications in the same age group \[44\], which implicitly assumes a duration of infectiousness of one year. We again modeled the prevalence with a Normal distribution using the mean and standard deviation of the reported notifications between 2015 and
2019.
For SARS-CoV-2, we approximated the prevalence using the weekly incidence of COVID- central estimates from The Economist’s excess death model \[47\] and divided them by the IFR
estimates from the COVID-19 Forecasting Team \[48\]. We sampled with replacement from the
weekly estimated excess deaths and from a Normal distribution for the IFRs using the reported
mean and 95%-confidence intervals. We then averaged each incidence sample across time
periods and used these averages to estimate the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission for each
country. The estimated incidences using our IFR-based approach are shown in Table 3. Since
time-updated IFR estimates were only available until January 2021, our modeled transmission
risks are for the early period of SARS-CoV-2, i.e. before widespread vaccination and the dominance of new SARS-CoV-2 variants such as delta and omicron. Note that by using weekly incidence as the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2, we implicitly assume a duration of infectiousness of
one week.

Sensitivity analyses

In the main analysis, we estimated the transmission risk of Mtb using the prevalence in the
young population (age group 15–24 years). Because this age group has been found to have the
most pronounced prevalence-to-notification gap \[49\], we performed a sensitivity check using
the prevalence in the general population. Second, we compared the transmission risk of
SARS-CoV-2 using the estimated incidence from our IFR-based approach with the transmission risk using the reported incidence \[50, 51\]. This comparison was only possible in Switzerland and South Africa, as national incidence was rarely reported in Tanzania \[45, 46\]. Third,
o o
we assessed the impact of assuming an outdoor CO2 level of C = 600 ppm instead of C =
o
400 ppm in each countries. Although many studies use C = 400 ppm \[20, 22, 27–30\], the outo
door CO2 levels can be C = 500 ppm or higher in urban areas, especially in the early morning,
mainly due to traffic-related emissions \[20\].

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

Additional analysis

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

In a further analysis, we considered an outbreak with one infectious person per classroom
(one infectious person scaled to the class size) and estimated the weekly risk of transmission
for both Mtb and SARS-CoV-2. In this hypothetical outbreak scenario, we also used the daily
average rebreathed air fractions instead of overall average rebreathed air fractions to account
for variations in daily ventilation.

Ethics statement

The ventilation of classrooms varied considerably between countries (Table 1). The average
CO2 level was 1,610 ppm in South Africa, 1,757 ppm in Switzerland, and 648 ppm in Tanzania.
These correspond to average rebreathed air fractions of 3.8% in South Africa, 4.3% in Switzerland, and 0.8% in Tanzania. There was considerable variation in CO2 levels over the study
period (Fig 1). Based on the daily maximum CO2 levels, the ventilation rate was (mean±stan-
-1-1-
dard deviation \[SD\]) 2.47±1.81 L s (1.48±1.08 air changes h) in South Africa, 2.29±0.88 L s
1-1-1-1
(0.71±0.27 air changes h) in Switzerland, and 12.36±7.46 L s (13.74±8.29 air changes h)
in Tanzania.

Data from schools in South Africa and Tanzania were previously published \[21, 22\]. The Canton of Bern Ethics Committee reviewed and approved data collection from schools in Switzerland (KEK; reference no. 2021–02377).

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

2.29{\\pm}0.88;\\mathrm{L};;

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

^{1},(0.71{\\pm!0.27}

* * *

(\\mathrm{C o}{}\_{2})

Fig 1. Carbon dioxide (CO2) levels in the classrooms of schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania. Histogram of the measured CO2
levels (in parts per million \[ppm\]) in each country. All distributions are truncated at 400ppm (left) and 4,000ppm (right).

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g001)

Risk of Mtb transmission

Risk of Mtb transmission
The annual transmission risk for Mtb is shown in Fig 2. Assuming medium classroom activiy,
the median risk was 22.1% (interquartile range \[IQR\] 2.7–89.5%) in South Africa, 0.7% (IQR
0.1–6.4%) in Switzerland, and 0.5% (0.0–3.9%) in Tanzania. Assuming low or high activity, the
median risk was 14.8% or 33.0% in South Africa, 0.5% or 1.2% in Switzerland, and 0.3% or
0.7% in Tanzania. Regardless of the assumption for the activity level, the 95%-credible intervals
(CrI) typically ranged from 0% to 100% in all countries due to the wide range of the distribution of the infectious quanta generation rate (i.e. we accounted for large heterogeneity in
patient infectiousness).
As a sensitivity analysis, we estimated the annual risk of Mtb transmission using the preva-

As a sensitivity analysis, we estimated the annual risk of Mtb transmission using the prevalence in the general population instead of the young population. In this case, the risk of infection
would be higher in all countries, but the relative differences between countries remained similar
(S1 Fig). We also examined the impact of assuming an outdoor CO2 level of 600 pm instead of
400 ppm. A higher outdoor CO2 level slightly reduced the estimated risk of transmission in all
countries but the relative differences between countries remained similar even when the outdoor CO2 level would be 200 pm higher in one country than in the others (S2 Fig).
As an additional analysis, we assumed an outbreak with one infectious patient per class-

Risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

The monthly transmission risk for SARS-CoV-2 is shown in Fig 4. Assuming medium classroom activiy, the median risk was 6.8% (interquartile range \[IQR\] 0.8–43.8%) in South Africa,
1.2% (IQR 0.1–5.6%) in Switzerland, and 0.9% (0.1–10.5%) in Tanzania. Assuming low or
high activity, the median risk was 4.6% or 27.6% in South Africa, 0.8% or 1.8% in Switzerland,

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

door CO2 level would be 200 pm higher in one country than in the others (S2 Fig).
As an additional analysis, we assumed an outbreak with one infectious patient per classroom (hypothetical scenario shown in Fig 3). Assuming medium activity, the median risk of
infection during a one-week outbreak would be 2.8% (IQR 0.3–23.5%) in South Africa, 3.8%
(IQR 0.4–29.3%) in Switzerland, and 0.6% (IQR 0.1–5.3%) in Tanzania.

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Airborne transmission in schools in Africa and Switzerland

South Africa Switzerland Tanzania

4 Annual risk of infection (%, square−root scale)

0 Low Medium High Activity level in the classroom

**Fig 2. Modeled transmission risk of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) in schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania. Annual**

transmission risk (median as dots, interquartile range as boxes, and 95%-CrI as lines) of Mtb. Three scenarios are considered: low (70% breathing, 25% speaking, 5% loud speaking), medium (50% breathing, 40% speaking, 10% loud speaking), and high activity (30% breathing, 50% speaking, 20% loud speaking). [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g002)

and 0.6% or 1.3% in Tanzania. Again, the 95%-credible intervals \[CrI\] ranged from 0% to 100% in all countries due to the wide range of the infectious quanta rate distribution. As a sensitivity analysis, we estimated the monthly risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission using the reported incidence in South Africa and Switzerland instead of the incidence estimated using our IFR-based approach. In this case, the risk of infection would be considerably lower in South Africa (S3 Fig), indicating significant underreporting of SARS-CoV-2 cases. Further- more, and similar to Mtb, assuming a higher outdoor CO2 level in one country slightly reduced the risk of transmission but the relative differences between countries remained similar (S4 Fig). Similar to Mtb, the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection during a one-week outbreak with one infectious person per classroom would be more comparable between countries (hypothetical scenario shown in Fig 5). Assuming medium activity, the median risk of infection would be

2.6% (IQR 0.3–18.2%) in South Africa, 3.4% (IQR 0.4–24.0%) in Switzerland, and 0.8% (IQR
0.1–6.1%) in Tanzania. **Discussion** We modeled the airborne transmission risk of Mtb and SARS-CoV-2 in secondary schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania. The annual risk of infection for Mtb and SARS-CoV- 2 during school was higher in South Africa than in Switzerland and Tanzania. Assuming a one-week outbreak with one infectious person per classroom, the risk of transmission in South Africa and Switzerland would be comparable, but still higher than in Tanzania because of bet- ter classroom ventilation in Tanzania.
PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800) January 18, 2024 8 / 17

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Airborne transmission in schools in Africa and Switzerland

South Africa Switzerland Tanzania

4 Weekly risk of infection (%, square−root scale)

0 Low Medium High Activity level in the classroom

**Fig 3. Modeled transmission risk during a hypothetical Mtb outbreak in schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania. Weekly Mtb**

transmission risk (median as dots, interquartile range as boxes, and 95%-CrI as lines) if there was one infectious person per classroom (hypothetical outbreak scenario). Three scenarios are considered: low (70% breathing, 25% speaking, 5% loud speaking), medium (50% breathing, 40% speaking, 10% loud speaking), and high activity (30% breathing, 50% speaking, 20% loud speaking). [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g003)

A few caveats about our results. First, we model the transmission risk during school hours. The overall transmission risk for students may be higher because they may also be exposed to SARS-CoV-2 and Mtb outside of school. Second, the Wells-Riley equation only models the risk of airborne transmission, but other routes of transmission are possible. For example, some studies have suggested transmission of SARS-CoV-2 via droplets and fomites \[52, 53\], although their contribution to overall transmission is thought to be small \[54–56\]. Third, we modeled the infectious quanta generation rate q with a Lognormal distribution based on previ- ous literature \[33\]. This distribution also covers a wide range of patient- and outbreak-specific estimates reported in the literature \[33–38\]. The variation in q is the result of variation in patient-specific infectiousness. As a result, the annual risk of transmission is typically low to moderate (see our IQR estimates), but can be extremely high (see our 95%-CrI estimates) if there is prolonged exposure to a highly infectious individual. Several studies have modeled transmission risks of respiratory infections in indoor settings within countries \[15, 21–23, 30, 57\]. However, to our knowledge, comparisons of transmission risks in schools between countries are lacking. Our comparison of the risk of transmission between schools in different countries sheds light on the impact that different incidences of infectious diseases and natural ventilation have on the risk of infection with Mtb and SARS- CoV-2. The results are consistent with our previously published modeled estimates for Tanza- nia and South Africa \[21, 22\]. Empirical estimates for the risk of infection are scarce. Based on population-level observational data, the cumulative risk SARS-CoV-2 infection among stu- dents in Germany was shown to be between 1% and 10%, depending on the phase of the pan- demic \[12\]. A systematic review concluded that the risk of infection following a SARS-CoV-2

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800) January 18, 2024 9 / 17

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Airborne transmission in schools in Africa and Switzerland

South Africa Switzerland Tanzania

Monthly risk of infection (%, square−root scale)

0 Low Medium High Activity level in the classroom

**Fig 4. Modeled transmission risk of SARS-CoV-2 in schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania. Monthly transmission risk (median**

as dots, interquartile range as boxes, and 95%-CrI as lines) of SARS-CoV-2. Three scenarios are considered: low (70% breathing, 25% speaking, 5% loud speaking), medium (50% breathing, 40% speaking, 10% loud speaking), and high activity (30% breathing, 50% speaking, 20% loud speaking). [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g004)

outbreak in a high-incidence setting was 1.7–28% for school teachers, which was usually higher than for students \[58\]. Furthermore, seroprevalence was 2.1–6.2% in Swiss schoolchildren (aged 6–16 years) during June-September 2020 \[59\], and 0–7% in rural and 11–29% in urban South African adolescents (aged 13–18 years) during July-September 2020, respectively \[60\]. Seroprevalence studies for Tanzania were not available \[61\]. _Mtb transmission is more difficult to estimate because of the lack of an appropriate in vitro_ test assay to measure infection \[62\]. Interferon-γ release blood tests (IGRAs) and tuberculin skin tests (TST) are commonly used to diagnose Mtb infection, but school-based surveys are rare. A recent study reported a TB infection incidence rate of 17.1 per 100 person-years among adolescents and young adults in South African communities of a cluster randomized trial \[63\]. The prevalence of TB infection among 12 to 18-year-olds is approximately 50% \[64\]. Using longitudinal IGRA data in a cross-sectional manner, the annual risk of infection has been shown to be as high as 14% \[64\]. In contrast to South Africa, which has one of the highest TB burdens in the world, the risk of infection in Tanzania is likely to be lower. Using IGRA data, the overall prevalence of TB in the 12 to 16-year-olds was estimated to be approximately 20% \[65\]. The annual risk of infection among 5 to 12-year-olds may be 5–10%, comparable to the risk in most high-burden countries \[66\], although survey data are lacking. A recent transmis- sion modeling study calibrated to TB prevalence and notification data estimated the annual risk of Mtb infection to be up to 15% in South Africa and about 2.5% in Tanzania \[67\]. A simi- lar modeling study using the Wells-Riley model with indoor CO2 levels and estimated TB prevalence found an estimated annual risk of infection of 11% in classrooms in KwaZulu- Natal, a high TB burden community in South Africa \[57\]. Overall, the empirical estimates for

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800) January 18, 2024 10 / 17

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Airborne transmission in schools in Africa and Switzerland

South Africa Switzerland Tanzania

4 Weekly risk of infection (%, square−root scale)

0 Low Medium High Activity level in the classroom

**Fig 5. Modeled transmission risk during a hypothetical SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania.**

Weekly transmission risk (median as dots, interquartile range as boxes, and 95%-CrI as lines) of SARS-CoV-2 if there was one infectious person per classroom (hypothetical outbreak scenario). Three scenarios are considered: low (70% breathing, 25% speaking, 5% loud speaking), medium (50% breathing, 40% speaking, 10% loud speaking), and high activity (30% breathing, 50% speaking, 20% loud speaking). [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800.g005)

SARS-CoV-2 and Mtb are roughly in line with our modeled estimates, given the uncertainty surrounding these estimates. For Mtb in South Africa, however, estimates from the literature appear to be more consistent with our lower scenario estimates. Environmental factors play an important role in the control of respiratory infections \[68\]. Previous studies have shown that inadequate ventilation facilitates the spread of Mtb in clinics and other public locations \[21, 22, 30\]. Based on our data, only Tanzania achieved air change rates above recommended levels \[22\]. Air change rates were below recommended levels in South Africa and Switzerland. Both countries ventilate their classrooms through window opening. Countries with limited resources may need to rely on natural ventilation and extend the times when doors and windows are open. In contrast, resource-rich countries can invest in improved building designs, mechanical ventilation systems, or hybrid solutions \[69\]. Our study has limitations. First, for SARS-CoV-2, we approximated the prevalence of infec- tious students in the room with disease incidence. While this approximation may bias the magnitude of the country-specific estimates, the biases will be in the same direction and thus have little impact on the comparison of transmission risks between countries. Second, we esti- mated incidence with a consistent approach using excess mortality and country-specific, time- updated infection-fatality ratios (IFR-based approach). On the one hand, this approach reduces substantial biases due to differences in reporting and testing practices between coun- tries, which can also be seen in the lower transmission risk of SARS-CoV-2 when using the reported instead of the estimated incidence (S1 Fig). On the other hand, the estimated inci- dence was modeled and our IFR-based approach may still underestimate the true incidence

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800) January 18, 2024 11 / 17

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Airborne transmission in schools in Africa and Switzerland

because positive effects such as reduced road traffic may partly offset the effect of COVID-19 on excess mortality \[70\]. Third, due to data limitations, we could only model the transmission risk of SARS-CoV-2 for the early period through January 2021. For example, related work sug- gests that the viral load (and thus the quanta generation rate) are higher for the SARS-CoV-2 delta variant \[71, 72\]. The CO2 measurements were collected during different time periods (South Africa: 2013, Switzerland: 2023, Tanzania: 2015). However, all data were collected during non-pandemic times and conditions and the schools in South Africa and Tanzania were structurally still the same (no relevant building work, renovations, or improvements). Notably, no evidence for exogenous CO2 sources was found in the classrooms. Although systematic national survey data are lacking, the local investigators \[21, 22, 26\] considered the data collection to be repre- sentative of the overall situation in each country. Moreover, the CO2 levels in the Swiss school are very similar to those found in a recent survey of 100 classrooms in Switzerland \[73\], as well as in other European countries \[74–78\]. Fifth, we assumed a fixed number of students per classroom. The sensitivity of this assumption is difficult to assess because changes in room occupancy are likely to be accompanied by changes in CO2 levels, but to different degrees depending on the ventilation setting. Finally, our modeling approach assumed a well-mixed airspace and constant outdoor air supply. We acknowledge that environmental characteristics introduce spatiotemporal variation in the concentration of infectious particles and, corre- spondingly, in the risk of infection \[2, 79, 80\]. In conclusion, we modeled and compared Mtb and SARS-CoV-2 transmission risks in schools in South Africa, Switzerland, and Tanzania. Country-specific risks of infection primar- ily reflect differences in the number of infectious students and natural ventilation. Global com- parisons identify high-risk settings and can inform prevention and mitigation strategies such as improved ventilation and other infection control measures.

## Supporting information

## S1 Table. Reported estimates in the literature for the infectious quanta generation rate (q)

## of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb).

(DOCX)

## S2 Table. Excess death estimates and time-updated, country-specific infection-fatality

## ratios (IFRs) used to estimate the incidence of SARS-CoV-2.

(DOCX)

## S1 Fig. Sensitivity analysis showing the risk of Mtb transmission using the prevalence of

## Mtb in the general population.

(DOCX)

## S2 Fig. Sensitivity analysis showing the risk of Mtb transmission risk assuming an outdoor

## CO2 level of 600 ppm in each country separately.

(DOCX)

## S3 Fig. Sensitivity analysis showing the transmission risk of SARS-CoV-2 using the

## reported incidence of SARS-CoV-2.

(DOCX)

## S4 Fig. Sensitivity analysis showing the transmission risk of SARS-CoV-2 assuming an out-

## door CO2 level of 600 parts per million \[ppm\] in each country separately.

(DOCX)

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800) January 18, 2024 12 / 17

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Airborne transmission in schools in Africa and Switzerland

**Acknowledgments**

We thank staff members involved in collecting environmental data.

## Author Contributions

## Conceptualization: Nicolas Banholzer, Robin Wood, Lukas Fenner.

## Data curation: Remo Schmutz, Keren Middelkoop, Jerry Hella.

## Formal analysis: Nicolas Banholzer, Remo Schmutz.

## Investigation: Jerry Hella, Matthias Egger, Robin Wood, Lukas Fenner.

## Methodology: Nicolas Banholzer, Remo Schmutz, Lukas Fenner.

## Project administration: Keren Middelkoop.

## Resources: Matthias Egger, Robin Wood, Lukas Fenner.

## Supervision: Lukas Fenner.

## Writing – original draft: Nicolas Banholzer, Remo Schmutz, Lukas Fenner.

## Writing – review & editing: Nicolas Banholzer, Remo Schmutz, Keren Middelkoop, Jerry

Hella, Matthias Egger, Robin Wood, Lukas Fenner.

**References**

**1.** Coleman KK, Tay DJW, Tan KS, Ong SWX, Than TS, Koh MH, et al. Viral load of Severe Acute Respi- ratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in respiratory aerosols emitted by patients with Corona- virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) while breathing, talking, and singing. Clin Infect Dis. 2022; 74: 1722–
1728\. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab691](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab691) PMID: 34358292
**2.** Wang CC, Prather KA, Sznitman J, Jimenez JL, Lakdawala SS, Tufekci Z, et al. Airborne transmission of respiratory viruses. Science. 2021; 373: eabd9149. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abd9149](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abd9149) PMID: 34446582
**3.** Wang C, Pan R, Wan X, Tan Y, Xu L, Ho CS, et al. Immediate psychological responses and associated factors during the initial stage of the 2019 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) epidemic among the gen- eral population in China. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020; 17: 1729. [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/) ijerph17051729 PMID: 32155789
**4.** Greenhalgh T, Peng Z, Jimenez JL, Bahnfleth W, Dancer SJ, Bourouiba L. Quantifying transmission risk of SARS-CoV-2 in different situations. BMJ. 2022; 376: o106. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.o106](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.o106) PMID: 35058231
**5.** Randall K, Ewing ET, Marr LC, Jimenez JL, Bourouiba L. How did we get here: What are droplets and aerosols and how far do they go? A historical perspective on the transmission of respiratory infectious diseases. Interface Focus. 2021; 11: 20210049. [https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2021.0049](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2021.0049) PMID: 34956601
**6.** Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). 11 Feb 2020 \[cited 7 Sep 2023\]. Available: [https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/science-briefs/sars-](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/science-briefs/sars-) cov-2-transmission.html
**7.** World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): How is it transmitted? 23 Dec 2021 \[cited 7 Sep 2023\]. Available: [https://www.who.int/news-room/questions-and-answers/item/coronavirus-](https://www.who.int/news-room/questions-and-answers/item/coronavirus-) disease-covid-19-how-is-it-transmitted
**8.** Fennelly KP. Particle sizes of infectious aerosols: implications for infection control. Lancet Respir Med. 2020; 8: 914–924. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)) 30323-4 PMID: 32717211
**9.** Rieder HL, Zwahlen M. Resurrecting historical lessons from tuberculosis research on airborne transmis- sion relevant to SARS-CoV-2. Swiss Med Wkly. 2021; 151: w30096. [https://doi.org/10.4414/smw.2021](https://doi.org/10.4414/smw.2021). w30096 PMID: 34846112
**10.** Shen J, Kong M, Dong B, Birnkrant MJ, Zhang J. Airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in indoor envi- ronments: A comprehensive review. Sci Technol Built Environ. 2021; 27: 1331–1367. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10). 1080/23744731.2021.1977693
PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002800) January 18, 2024 13 / 17

* * *

11. Walsh S, Chowdhury A, Braithwaite V, Russell S, Birch JM, Ward JL, et al. Do school closures and
    school reopenings affect community transmission of COVID-19? A systematic review of observational
    studies. BMJ Open. 2021; 11: e053371. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053371](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053371) PMID:
    34404718
12. Heinsohn T, Lange B, Vanella P, Rodiah I, Glo¨ ckner S, Joachim A, et al. Infection and transmission
    risks of COVID-19 in schools and their contribution to population infections in Germany: A retrospective
    observational study using nationwide and regional health and education agency notification data. PLOS
    Med. 2022; 19: e1003913. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003913](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003913) PMID: 36538517
13. Zhu Y, Xia Y, Pickering J, Bowen AC, Short KR. The role of children in transmission of SARS-CoV-2
    variants of concern within households: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis, as at 30 June
14. Eurosurveillance. 2023; 28: 2200624. [https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2023.28.18](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2023.28.18).
    2200624 PMID: 37140450
15. Gettings J, Czarnik M, Morris E, Haller E, Thompson-Paul AM, Rasberry C, et al. Mask use and ventilation improvements to reduce COVID-19 incidence in elementary schools—Georgia, November 16–
    December 11, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021; 70: 779–784. [https://doi.org/10.15585/](https://doi.org/10.15585/)
    mmwr.mm7021e1 PMID: 34043610
16. Banholzer N, Zu¨ rcher K, Jent P, Bittel P, Furrer L, Egger M, et al. SARS-CoV-2 transmission with and
    without mask wearing or air cleaners in schools in Switzerland: A modeling study of epidemiological,
    environmental, and molecular data. PLOS Med. 2023; 20: e1004226. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal).
    pmed.1004226 PMID: 37200241
17. Atkinson J, Chartier Y, Pessoa-Silva CL, Jensen P, Li Y, Seto W-H, editors. Natural ventilation for infection control in health-care settings. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009. Available: [http://www](http://www/).
    ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK143284/
18. Escombe AR, Oeser CC, Gilman RH, Navincopa M, Ticona E, Pan W, et al. Natural ventilation for the
    prevention of airborne contagion. PLOS Med. 2007; 4: e68. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed).
    0040068 PMID: 17326709
19. Qian H, Li Y, Seto WH, Ching P, Ching WH, Sun HQ. Natural ventilation for reducing airborne infection
    in hospitals. Build Environ. 2010; 45: 559–565. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2009.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2009.07.011) PMID:
    32288008
20. Buonanno G, Ricolfi L, Morawska L, Stabile L. Increasing ventilation reduces SARS-CoV-2 airborne
    transmission in schools: A retrospective cohort study in Italy’s Marche region. Front Public Health.
    2022; 10. Available: [https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1087087](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1087087)
21. Batterman S. Review and extension of CO2-based methods to determine ventilation rates with application to school classrooms. Int J Env Res Public Health. 2017; 14: 145. [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/)
    ijerph14020145 PMID: 28165398
22. Hella J, Morrow C, Mhimbira F, Ginsberg S, Chitnis N, Gagneux S, et al. Tuberculosis transmission in
    public locations in Tanzania: A novel approach to studying airborne disease transmission. J Infect.
    2017; 75: 191–197. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2017.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2017.06.009) PMID: 28676410
23. Richardson ET, Morrow CD, Kalil DB, Bekker L-G, Wood R. Shared air: A renewed focus on ventilation
    for the prevention of Tuberculosis transmission. PLOS ONE. 2014; 9: e96334. [https://doi.org/10.1371/](https://doi.org/10.1371/)
    journal.pone.0096334 PMID: 24804707
24. Beckwith PG, Karat AS, Govender I, Deol AK, McCreesh N, Kielmann K, et al. Direct estimates of absolute ventilation and estimated Mycobacterium tuberculosis transmission risk in clinics in South Africa.
    PLOS Glob Public Health. 2022; 2: e0000603. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000603](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000603) PMID:
    36962521
25. Riley EC, Murphy G, Riley RL. Airborne spread of Measles in a suburban elementary school. Am J Epidemiol. 1978; 107: 421–432. [https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112560](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112560) PMID: 665658
26. Rudnick SN, Milton DK. Risk of indoor airborne infection transmission estimated from carbon dioxide
    concentration. Indoor Air. 2003; 13: 237–245. [https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0668.2003.00189.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0668.2003.00189.x) PMID:
    12950586
27. Banholzer N, Jent P, Bittel P, Furrer L, Hascher T, Fenner L. Transmission of airborne respiratory infections with and without air cleaners in a school in Switzerland: A modeling study of epidemiological, environmental, and molecular data. OSF; 17 May 2023 \[cited 7 Sep 2023\]. Available: [https://osf.io/38j9g/](https://osf.io/38j9g/)
28. Riediker M, Briceno-Ayala L, Ichihara G, Albani D, Poffet D, Tsai D-H, et al. Higher viral load and infectivity increase risk of aerosol transmission for Delta and Omicron variants of SARS-CoV-2. Swiss Med
    Wkly. 2022; 152: w30133–w30133. [https://doi.org/10.4414/smw.2022.w30133](https://doi.org/10.4414/smw.2022.w30133) PMID: 35019196
29. Woodward H, de Kreij RJB, Kruger ES, Fan S, Tiwari A, Hama S, et al. An evaluation of the risk of airborne transmission of COVID-19 on an inter-city train carriage. Indoor Air. 2022; 32: e13121. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1111/ina.13121 PMID: 36305073

* * *

29. Di Gilio A, Palmisani J, Pulimeno M, Cerino F, Cacace M, Miani A, et al. CO2 concentration monitoring
    inside educational buildings as a strategic tool to reduce the risk of Sars-CoV-2 airborne transmission.
    Environ Res. 2021; 202: 111560. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.111560](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.111560) PMID: 34224708

30. Zu¨ rcher K, Riou J, Morrow C, Ballif M, Koch A, Bertschinger S, et al. Estimating tuberculosis transmission risks in a primary care clinic in South Africa: Modeling of environmental and clinical data. J Infect
    Dis. 2022; 225: 1642–1652. [https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiab534](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiab534) PMID: 35039860

31. Persily A, de Jonge L. Carbon dioxide generation rates for building occupants. Indoor Air. 2017; 27:
    868–879. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12383](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12383) PMID: 28321932

32. OECD. Education at a Glance 2019: OECD Indicators. OECD; 2019. [https://doi.org/10.1787/](https://doi.org/10.1787/)
    f8d7880d-en

33. Mikszewski A, Stabile L, Buonanno G, Morawska L. The airborne contagiousness of respiratory viruses:
    A comparative analysis and implications for mitigation. Geosci Front. 2021; 13: 101285. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
    10.1016/j.gsf.2021.101285

34. Buonanno G, Morawska L, Stabile L. Quantitative assessment of the risk of airborne transmission of
    SARS-CoV-2 infection: Prospective and retrospective applications. Environ Int. 2020; 145: 106112.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106112](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106112) PMID: 32927282

35. Andrews JR, Morrow C, Walensky RP, Wood R. Integrating social contact and environmental data in
    evaluating Tuberculosis transmission in a South African township. J Infect Dis. 2014; 210: 597–603.
    [https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiu138](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiu138) PMID: 24610874

36. Riley RL, Mills CC, O’grady F, Sultan LU, Wittstadt F, Shivpuri DN. Infectiousness of air from a tuberculosis ward. Ultraviolet irradiation of infected air: Comparative infectiousness of different patients. Am
    Rev Respir Dis. 1962; 85: 511–525. [https://doi.org/10.1164/arrd.1962.85.4.511](https://doi.org/10.1164/arrd.1962.85.4.511) PMID: 14492300

37. Nardell EA, Keegan J, Cheney SA, Etkind SC. Airborne infection: Theoretical limits of protection achievable by building ventilation. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1991; 144: 302–306. [https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm/](https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm/)
    144.2.302 PMID: 1907115

38. Escombe AR, Moore DAJ, Gilman RH, Pan W, Navincopa M, Ticona E, et al. The infectiousness of
    tuberculosis patients coinfected with HIV. PLOS Med. 2008; 5: e188. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal).
    pmed.0050188 PMID: 18798687

39. Adams WC. Measurement of breathing rate and volume in routinely performed daily activities \[final\
    report\]. Human Performance Laboratory, Physical Education Department, University of California,
    Davis; 1993. Report No.: A033-205. Available: [https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/sites/default/files/classic/](https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/sites/default/files/classic/)
    research/apr/past/a033-205.pdf

40. Stadnytskyi V, Bax CE, Bax A, Anfinrud P. The airborne lifetime of small speech droplets and their
    potential importance in SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2020; 117: 11875–11877.
    [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006874117](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006874117) PMID: 32404416

41. Morawska L, Johnson GR, Ristovski ZD, Hargreaves M, Mengersen K, Corbett S, et al. Size distribution
    and sites of origin of droplets expelled from the human respiratory tract during expiratory activities. J
    Aerosol Sci. 2009; 40: 256–269. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2008.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2008.11.002)

42. Senkoro M, Mfinanga S, Egwaga S, Mtandu R, Kamara DV, Basra D, et al. Prevalence of pulmonary
    tuberculosis in adult population of Tanzania: A national survey, 2012. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2016; 20:
    1014–1021. [https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.15.0340](https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.15.0340) PMID: 27393533

43. Moyo S, Ismail F, Walt MV der, Ismail N, Mkhondo N, Dlamini S, et al. Prevalence of bacteriologically
    confirmed pulmonary tuberculosis in South Africa, 2017–19: A multistage, cluster-based, cross-sectional survey. Lancet Infect Dis. 2022; 22: 1172–1180. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(22)00149-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(22)00149-9)
    PMID: 35594897

44. Bundesamt fu¨ r Gesundheit BAG. Zahlen zu Infektionskrankheiten. 28 Aug 2019 \[cited 7 Sep 2023\].
    Available: [https://www.bag.admin.ch/bag/de/home/zahlen-und-statistiken/zahlen-zuinfektionskrankheiten.html](https://www.bag.admin.ch/bag/de/home/zahlen-und-statistiken/zahlen-zuinfektionskrankheiten.html)

45. Buguzi S. Covid-19: Counting the cost of denial in Tanzania. BMJ. 2021; 373: n1052. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1136/bmj.n1052 PMID: 33906903

46. Murewanhema G, Dzinamarira T. The COVID-19 pandemic: Public health responses in Sub-Saharan
    Africa. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022; 19: 4448. [https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19084448](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19084448) PMID:
    35457314

47. The Economist, Solstad S. The pandemic’s true death toll. 8 Sep 2023 \[cited 8 Sep 2023\]. Available:
    [https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/coronavirus-excess-deaths-estimates](https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/coronavirus-excess-deaths-estimates)

48. COVID-19 Forecasting Team. Variation in the COVID-19 infection–fatality ratio by age, time, and geography during the pre-vaccine era: A systematic analysis. The Lancet. 2022; 399: 1469–1488. https://

49. COVID-19 Forecasting Team. Variation in the COVID-19 infection–fatality ratio by age, time, and geography during the pre-vaccine era: A systematic analysis. The Lancet. 2022; 399: 1469–1488. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02867-1 PMID: 35219376


* * *

49. Pillay Y, Mvusi L, Mametja LD, Dlamini S. What did we learn from South Africa’s first-ever tuberculosis
    prevalence survey? South Afr Med J Suid-Afr Tydskr Vir Geneeskd. 2021; 111: 402–404. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.7196/SAMJ.2021.v111i5.15662 PMID: 34852877
50. World Health Organization. WHO Coronavirus (COVID-19) Dashboard. 2023 \[cited 28 Sep 2023\].
    Available: [https://covid19.who.int](https://covid19.who.int/)
51. Federal Office of Public Health FOPH. COVID-19 Switzerland \| Coronavirus \| Dashboard. 2023 \[cited\
    28 Sep 2023\]. Available: [https://www.covid19.admin.ch/en/overview](https://www.covid19.admin.ch/en/overview)
52. Zhou J, Singanayagam A, Goonawardane N, Moshe M, Sweeney FP, Sukhova K, et al. Viral emissions
    into the air and environment after SARS-CoV-2 human challenge: A phase 1, open label, first-in-human
    study. Lancet Microbe. 2023; 4: e579–e590. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(23)00101-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(23)00101-5) PMID:
    37307844
53. Geng Y, Wang Y. Stability and transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 in the environment. J Med Virol. 2023;
    95: e28103. [https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28103](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28103) PMID: 36039831
54. Short KR, Cowling BJ. Assessing the potential for fomite transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Lancet Microbe.
    2023; 4: e380–e381. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(23)00099-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(23)00099-X) PMID: 37031688
55. Greenhalgh T, Jimenez JL, Prather KA, Tufeki Z, Fisman D, Schooley R. Transmission of SARS-CoV-
    2: Still up in the air–Authors’ reply. The Lancet. 2022; 399: 519–520. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-)
    6736(21)02795-1 PMID: 35123690
56. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Science Brief: SARS-CoV-2 and surface (fomite) transmission for indoor community environments. In: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention \[Internet\]. 11
    Feb 2020 \[cited 7 Sep 2023\]. Available: [https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/more/scienceand-research/surface-transmission.html](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/more/scienceand-research/surface-transmission.html)
57. Taylor JG, Yates TA, Mthethwa M, Tanser F, Abubakar I, Altamirano H. Measuring ventilation and
    modelling M. tuberculosis transmission in indoor congregate settings, rural KwaZulu-Natal. Int J Tuberc
    Lung Dis. 2016; 20: 1155–1161. [https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.16.0085](https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.16.0085) PMID: 27510239
58. Karki SJ, Joachim A, Heinsohn T, Lange B. Risk of infection and contribution to transmission of SARS-
    CoV-2 in school staff: A systematic review. BMJ Open. 2021; 11: e052690. [https://doi.org/10.1136/](https://doi.org/10.1136/)
    bmjopen-2021-052690 PMID: 34732489
59. Ulyte A, Haile SR, Blankenberger J, Radtke T, Puhan MA, Kriemler S. SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence in
    children, parents and school personnel from June 2020 to April 2021: cohort study of 55 schools in Switzerland. Swiss Med Wkly. 2022; 152: w30193–w30193. [https://doi.org/10.4414/smw.2022.w30193](https://doi.org/10.4414/smw.2022.w30193)
    PMID: 35752960
60. Kleynhans J, Tempia S, Wolter N, Gottberg A von, Bhiman JN, Buys A, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Seroprevalence in a rural and urban household cohort during first and second waves of infections, South Africa,
    July 2020–March 2021. 2021; 27: 3020–3029. [https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2712.211465](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2712.211465) PMID:
    34477548
61. Lewis HC, Ware H, Whelan M, Subissi L, Li Z, Ma X, et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection in Africa: A systematic
    review and meta-analysis of standardised seroprevalence studies, from January 2020 to December
62. BMJ Glob Health. 2022; 7: e008793. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2022-008793](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2022-008793) PMID:
    35998978
63. Hill PC, Ota MO. Tuberculosis case-contact research in endemic tropical settings: Design, conduct, and
    relevance to other infectious diseases. Lancet Infect Dis. 2010; 10: 723–732. [https://doi.org/10.1016/](https://doi.org/10.1016/)
    S1473-3099(10)70164-X PMID: 20883968
64. Shanaube K, Schaap A, Mureithi L, Amofa-Sekyi M, Paulsen R, Cheeba M, et al. The impact of a combined TB/HIV intervention on the incidence of TB infection among adolescents and young adults in the
    HPTN 071 (PopART) trial communities in Zambia and South Africa. PLOS Glob Public Health. 2023; 3:
    e0001473. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001473](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001473) PMID: 37450474
65. Andrews JR, Hatherill M, Mahomed H, Hanekom WA, Campo M, Hawn TR, et al. The dynamics of
    QuantiFERON-TB Gold in-tube conversion and reversion in a cohort of South African adolescents. Am
    J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015; 191: 584–591. [https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201409-1704OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201409-1704OC) PMID:
    25562578
66. Jeremiah K, Lyimo E, Ritz C, PrayGod G, Rutkowski KT, Korsholm KS, et al. Prevalence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection as measured by the QuantiFERON-TB Gold assay and ESAT-6 free IGRA
    among adolescents in Mwanza, Tanzania. PLOS ONE. 2021; 16: e0252808. [https://doi.org/10.1371/](https://doi.org/10.1371/)
    journal.pone.0252808 PMID: 34097715
67. Dowdy DW, Behr MA. Are we underestimating the annual risk of infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis in high-burden settings? Lancet Infect Dis. 2022; 22: e271–e278. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-)
    3099(22)00153-0 PMID: 35526558

* * *

67. Dodd PJ, Shaweno D, Ku C-C, Glaziou P, Pretorius C, Hayes RJ, et al. Transmission modeling to infer
    tuberculosis incidence prevalence and mortality in settings with generalized HIV epidemics. Nat Commun. 2023; 14: 1639. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37314-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37314-1) PMID: 36964130
68. Morawska L, Allen J, Bahnfleth W, Bluyssen PM, Boerstra A, Buonanno G, et al. A paradigm shift to
    combat indoor respiratory infection. Science. 2021; 372: 689–691. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science](https://doi.org/10.1126/science).
    abg2025 PMID: 33986171
69. Nardell EA. Transmission and institutional infection control of Tuberculosis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect
    Med. 2016; 6: a018192. [https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a018192](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a018192) PMID: 26292985
70. Riou J, Hauser A, Fesser A, Althaus CL, Egger M, Konstantinoudis G. Direct and indirect effects of the
    COVID-19 pandemic on mortality in Switzerland. Nat Commun. 2023; 14: 90. [https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/)
    s41467-022-35770-9 PMID: 36609356
71. Puhach O, Meyer B, Eckerle I. SARS-CoV-2 viral load and shedding kinetics. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2023;
    21: 147–161. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00822-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00822-w) PMID: 36460930
72. Mikszewski A, Stabile L, Buonanno G, Morawska L. Increased close proximity airborne transmission of
    the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant. Sci Total Environ. 2022; 816: 151499. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j](https://doi.org/10.1016/j).
    scitotenv.2021.151499 PMID: 34752865
73. Vassella CC, Koch J, Henzi A, Jordan A, Waeber R, Iannaccone R, et al. From spontaneous to strategic
    natural window ventilation: Improving indoor air quality in Swiss schools. Int J Hyg Environ Health.
    2021; 234: 113746. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2021.113746](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2021.113746) PMID: 33819800
74. Fromme H, Heitmann D, Dietrich S, Schierl R, Ko¨ rner W, Kiranoglu M, et al. Raumluftqualita¨ t in Schulen–Belastung von Klassenra¨ umen mit Kohlendioxid (CO2), flu¨ chtigen organischen Verbindungen
    (VOC), Aldehyden, Endotoxinen und Katzenallergenen. Gesundheitswesen. 2008; 70: 88–97. https://
    doi.org/10.1055/s-2008-1046775 PMID: 18348098
75. Harrington S, Mulville M, Stravoravdis S. The relationship between ventilation rates in schools and the
    indoor airborne transmission potential of COVID-19. Archit Eng Des Manag. 2023; 0: 1–18. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1080/17452007.2023.2263519
76. Zs Bako´ -Biro´, Clements-Croome DJ, Kochhar N, Awbi HB, Williams MJ. Ventilation rates in schools
    and pupils’ performance. Build Environ. 2012; 48: 215–223. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.08](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.08).
    018
77. Geelen LMJ, Huijbregts MAJ, Ragas AMJ, Bretveld RW, Jans HWA, Van Doorn WJ, et al. Comparing
    the effectiveness of interventions to improve ventilation behavior in primary schools. Indoor Air. 2008;
    18: 416–424. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2008.00542.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2008.00542.x) PMID: 18673396
78. Fisk WJ. The ventilation problem in schools: literature review. Indoor Air. 2017; 27: 1039–1051. https://
    doi.org/10.1111/ina.12403 PMID: 28683161
79. Li Y, Leung GM, Tang JW, Yang X, Chao CY, Lin JZ, et al. Role of ventilation in airborne transmission
    of infectious agents in the built environment—a multidisciplinary systematic review. Indoor Air. 2007;
    17: 2–18. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2006.00445.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2006.00445.x) PMID: 17257148
80. Wang K, Ho K-F, Leung LY-T, Chow K-M, Cheung Y-Y, Tsang D, et al. Risk of air and surface contamination of SARS-CoV-2 in isolation wards and its relationship with patient and environmental characteristics. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2022; 241: 113740. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2022.113740](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2022.113740) PMID:
    35687998