RESEARCH ARTICLE

Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for
students with intellectual and developmental
disabilities (IDD)

OPEN ACCESS

Citation: Zand MS, Spallina S, Ross A, Zandi K,
Pawlowski A, Seplaki CL, et al. (2024) Ventilation
during COVID-19 in a school for students with
intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD).
PLoS ONE 19(4): e0291840. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.1371/journal.pone.0291840

Editor: Yanping Yuan, Southwest Jiaotong
University, CHINA

Data Availability Statement: All relevant data are
within the manuscript and its Supporting
information files.

Received: September 5, 2023

Accepted: February 21, 2024

1,2,3 4☯ 5☯ 5‡
Martin S. ZandID \*, Samantha SpallinaID, Alexis Ross, Karen Zandi,
5‡ 3,6
Anne Pawlowski, Christopher L. Seplaki, Jonathan HeringtonID7, Anthony
M. CorbettID2, Kimberly Kaukeinen2, Jeanne Holden-WiltseID2, Edward G. Freedman4,
Lisette AlcantaraID2, Dongmei Li2, Andrew CameronID8, Nicole Beaumont4, Ann Dozier3,
Stephen Dewhurst9, John J. FoxeID4

Published: April 3, 2024

1 Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States of
America, 2 Clinical and Translational Science Institute, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States
of America, 3 Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States
of America, 4 The Frederick J. and Marion A. Schindler Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, The Ernest J.
Del Monte Institute for Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, United States of America, 5 The Mary Cariola Center, Rochester, NY,
United States of America, 6 Department of Psychiatry, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States
of America, 7 Department of Health Humanities and Bioethics, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY,
United States of America, 8 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY, United States of America, 9 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States of America

☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡KZ, and AP also contributed equally to this work.

- [martin\_zand@urmc.rochester.edu](mailto:martin_zand@urmc.rochester.edu)

Abstract

This study examined the correlation of classroom ventilation (air exchanges per hour (ACH))
and exposure to CO21,000 ppm with the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 over a 20-month
period in a specialized school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities
(IDD). These students were at a higher risk of respiratory infection from SARS-CoV-2 due to
challenges in tolerating mitigation measures (e.g. masking). One in-school measure proposed to help mitigate the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection in schools is increased ventilation.

Cmathsf{O}\_{2}!\ \ !1,0!00

Results

Methods

* * *

Funding: Research reported in this Rapid
Acceleration of Diagnostics – Underserved
Populations (RADx-UP- [https://radx-up.org/](https://radx-up.org/))
publication was supported by the National
Institutes of Health under OT2 HD107553 (JF, MZ,
SD, SS, AR, KZ, AP, CS, JH, AC, EF, LA, NB, AD,
AC}. This work was also supported by the
University of Rochester Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities Research Center- P50
HD103536 (JF, MZ, SD, EF, NB, KK, JHW) from the
NIH Eunice Kennedy Shriver Institute of Child
Health and Human Development- [https://www](https://www/).
nichd.nih.gov/, and the University of Rochester
Clinical and Translational Science Award UL1
TR002001 (MZ, JHW, KK, AC, AD) from the
National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences of the National Institutes of Health [https://ncats.nih.gov/](https://ncats.nih.gov/). The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institutes of Health. The funders had no
role in study design, data collection, and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.

that a room had CO2 levels 1,000 ppm and SARS-CoV-2 PCR tests normalized to room
occupancy, accounting for 43% of the variance. No statistically significant correlation was
found for room ACH and per-room SARS-CoV-2 cases. Rooms with ventilation systems
using MERV-13 filters had lower SARS-CoV-2-positive PCR counts. These findings led to
ongoing efforts to upgrade the ventilation systems in this community-engaged research
project.

Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{c O\_{2}}

Conclusions

There was a statistically significant correlation between the total time of room CO2 concentrations 1,000 and SARS-CoV-2 cases in an IDD school. Merv-13 filters appear to
decrease the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection. This research partnership identified areas
for improving in-school ventilation.

Introduction

A variety of mitigation measures have been employed to prevent SARS-CoV-2 exposure and
infection, including immunologic (e.g. vaccination, monoclonal antibodies), antiviral (e.g.
paxlovid), and isolation methods (e.g. masking, physical distancing, stay-at-home policies). A
key approach to environmental mitigation has been the use of high volume ventilation of
enclosed spaces (i.e. adequate flow of fresh, uncontaminated air), which has been shown to
decrease the risk of infection from a variety of respiratory pathogens \[1–3\], and this effect has
been widely presumed to include SARS-CoV-2. Schools were an immediate focus in many
areas with respect to mitigation measures for SARS-CoV-2, including potentially costly recommendations for improving ventilation. However, very little data are available assessing the
actual impact of ventilation on in-school transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
The SARS-CoV-2 β-coronavirus is spread primarily via airborne droplets and aerosols,

The SARS-CoV-2 β-coronavirus is spread primarily via airborne droplets and aerosols,
which can remain circulating for up to three hours \[4\]. Ventilation is defined as the process of
supplying clean air to the indoor air of a dwelling by natural (e.g., open windows if the outdoor
air is sufficiently clean) or mechanical means (e.g. heating, ventilation, and air conditioning;
HVAC) often involving recirculating the air after cleaning with a filter \[5\]. Increasing ventilation is one means of reducing exposure to airborne viral pathogens, and increasing ventilation
rates and upgrading inline HVAC particle filters (e.g. from MERV-8 to MERV-13) were
widely recommended for public venues including businesses, transportation, and schools \[6–\
8\]. For schools specifically, improving ventilation as a risk reduction strategy was the subject
of many recommendations \[8–11\]. However, very little robust data are available assessing the
actual impact of improved ventilation on in-school transmission of SARS-CoV-2. One study
found 74% lower aggregate rates of COVID-19 in schools with mechanical versus natural ventilation \[12\]. While there have been reports of outbreaks within schools \[13, 14\], a number of
epidemiological studies have concluded that students and school staff had relatively low risk of
SARS-CoV-2 in-school transmission \[15–17\] and schools were unlikely to be a major factor in
the pandemic spread \[18\].
Despite the larger number of epidemiological studies in public schools, we are not aware of

Despite the larger number of epidemiological studies in public schools, we are not aware of
similar studies in schools for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD),
who face greater risks \[19–24\], and impacts from, infection. The majority of students with
IDD are served by IDD-specialized schools that provide educational services, comprehensive clinical services, speech and psychological interventions, nutritional needs, and physical care.
Staff-to-student ratios are much higher than in typical K-12 schools, with more frequent, sustained and close physical contact between staff and students \[25\]. Students with an IDD are at
higher risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 \[25\], severe infection, and mortality \[24\]. The IDD
spectrum covers many conditions (e.g. autism spectrum disorder, genetic disorders), which
are associated with immune abnormalities that increase risk of SARS-CoV-2 and poor vaccine
responses \[19–24\]. Many students with an IDD have difficulty with conventional infection
prevention measures such as masking and social distancing. This also puts staff in IDD settings
at higher risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 from asymptomatic but infected students. Conversely, the impact on IDD students, and their caregivers, of school closures, isolation and
quarantine is heightened \[26\]. IDD students receive many specialized services (e.g. physical
and speech therapy) in school that are not readily available at home. Thus, it is essential to
identify interventions that are implementable in the unique environment of IDD-specialized
schools that retain students in school while mitigating the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Increased ventilation has been proposed as one such measure.
Time series measurements of CO2 levels have been used as a frequent surrogate for venti-

Time series measurements of CO2 levels have been used as a frequent surrogate for ventilation adequacy in schools \[8, 27–32\]. As CO2 is exhaled during respiration, it accumulates
in indoor spaces depending on the air exchange rates. The dynamic balance between CO2
production and ventilation with air having a lower CO2 concentration determines the timevarying CO2 concentration within a room. Accordingly, time series measurements of room
CO2 concentrations can be used to derive a surrogate marker for ventilation adequacy, typically measured as air changes per hour (ACH) \[27\]. International guidelines recommend a
minimum of 4 ACH for school classrooms, and 8–15 ACH for auditoriums, athletic facilities, cafeterias and other high-density or high-activity enclosed spaces \[5\]. Mismatched ventilation can result in elevated indoor CO2 levels that can affect learning and cognitive
performance \[33\], areas of key focus in schools for students with an IDD. Unfortunately,
many school buildings have outdated HVAC systems, resulting in low or very low ACH \[6,\
34, 35\].
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) program “Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics for

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O}\_{2}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) program “Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics for
Underserved Populations (RADx-UP)” was designed to study ways to support vulnerable populations during the COVID-19 pandemic. A major goal of the program was to study strategies
to keep vulnerable populations of students in school while mitigating the risk of exposure and
in-school spread of SARS-CoV-2 among students and staff. Primarily designed to study the
utility of screening for infection with frequent molecular testing, our RADx-UP project work
has also focused on the effect of a variety of measures on mitigating exposure and infection in
an IDD-specialized school setting. Here we report the results of an extensive study of ventilation across 3 buildings and 100 rooms in an IDD school for children and young adults (ages
3–21 years) during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.

Methods

This study was approved by the University of Rochester Medical Center Research Subjects
Review Board (RSRB STUDY00005294). Participants provided written informed consent, and
parents or guardians provided consent for minors. Recruitment occurred April 1, 2021 and
through May 31 2023. All subjects’ information and research data were coded in compliance
with the Department of Health and Human Services Regulations for the Protection of Human
Subjects (45 CFR 46.101(b) (4)).

* * *

Room and building data

The school in this study is composed of 3 different buildings, each with a varying number of
classrooms, therapy and activity rooms, gyms, and a variety of offices. We purposefully
selected 100 school rooms, from a total of 267, reflecting the different room types in use across
the 3 different buildings. Metadata collected included a unique room identifier, building,
square footage, ceiling height, total occupancy range, and room type (e.g. classroom, therapy,
etc.). In addition, we obtained further data regarding the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems used in each building relevant to the study, including type of ventilation (1 versus 2 stage), percentage of outside air mixing, and filtering (S1 File).

SARS-CoV-2 case data

Total counts of positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR tests were tabulated for the period from August
2021—August 2022 for the rooms where CO2 concentrations were measured. During this
period at the school, most individuals spent the majority of the day in a single classroom, and
thus positive tests were associated with the primary classroom assignment for any individual.
Individuals who tested positive within 30 days of a prior positive PCR were considered single
infections.

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

CO2 measurements

\\mathbf{c O\_{2}}

In November 2022, we measured ambient CO2 levels, temperature, and humidity in 100 school
rooms using ARANET4 sensors (Aranet, Aurora Colorado) with firmware version 1.2, with
one sensor per classroom, twenty classrooms at a time. Monitors were placed on the ceiling
near the air return vents in the center of the room to ensure mixing and avoid dead spaces
within each room. In a small number of rooms, where ceiling placement was not possible,
monitors were placed on side walls near air return vents. The indicator screens of the devices
were covered so that classroom occupants would not alter ventilation (e.g. open windows or
doors) outside of their usual pattern. Sensors were set to record ambient CO2, temperature,
and humidity levels every 2 minutes continuously for 24–72 hours. Data were downloaded to
an iPad (Apple Inc., Cupertino CA) using the Aranet manufacturer’s software as a.CSV file.
Each record in a.CSV file identified the sensor and time of each measurement. A separate.
CSV file identified the school room and sampling start and stop times. Individual.CSV files
were then processed with a custom R program that added the unique room ID number to each
record based on the sampling start and stop times and the unique sensor ID. Duplicate records
were removed. The final data set contained 150,286 individual measurements (S2 File). To
assess intra-day variation, some rooms had data continuously recorded for up to 120 hours,
both during the normal weekly school day, and over the weekend to assess temperature
variations.

Air changes per hour estimation
To estimate air changes per hour (ACH), CO2

(mathrm{A C H}),\\mathrm{C O}\_{2}

\ \\cdot\\sigma{=}1(

c\_{i}^{m a x}-c\_{i}^{m i n}<120

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

**Fig 1. Estimation of air changes per hour using ambient CO2 levels. Example of CO2** time series measurement, peak identification and fitting. A: CO2 levels

versus time in curve with Gaussian smoothing window of 10, and peak (red triangle) and valley (blue triangle) identification. Segments with a long tail were truncated at the point where subsequent readings were only 2% lower than the mean of the previous 10 readings. B. Eq 1 was fitted to each set of interval data using NonlinearModelFit function in Mathematica, and the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm option. In those rooms with multiple (peak, valley) segments, the final room ACH value was estimated by averaging the estimates from all segments. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g001)

exponential decay curve \[27\] of the form:

_c_ _t_ ¼ ðc _ma_ _i_ _x_ _cR_ Þe at þ c _R_ ð1Þ

to each time series segment between successive ðc _max_ _i; c_ _min_ _i_ Þ pairs, where i = number of segments identified for an individual room, α is air exchanges per hour, and t is the time from c _max_ _i_ to _c_ _min_

_i_. Fitting was performed using the NonlinearModelFit function in Mathematica with the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm option (Fig 1). The room airflow needed to achieve 4 air changes per hour was estimated using the volume of the room (cubic feet) divided by 4.

## Statistical analysis

The incidence of positive PCR tests in each room over 12 months was normalized to mean room occupancy from 1 month worth of attendance and occupancy data during a fall semester of the school year in 2022 during the COVID-19 pandemic. Correlation between occupancy normalized counts of positive SARS-CoV-2 tests and air changes per hour (ACH) or exposure time to CO2 1,000 ppm were calculated using the non-parametric Spearman’s rank correla- tion test, with the explained variance reported as the Spearman’s ρ statistic.

**Results**

## Room characteristics

We sampled 100 rooms spread across three buildings. Two buildings had single stage HVAC systems, which supplied ventilation only when triggered by the need for heating during the sampling period (November), while the third building had a two stage HVAC system. Set- points for heating were set at 70˚F from 6 AM—6 PM, and 65˚F outside those hours. Outside temperatures during the measurement periods were all 65˚F. For all HVAC systems, air pro- vided to rooms was 20% outside and 80% recirculated air. One building had HVAC systems

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 5 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

**Fig 2. Capacity and volume of study rooms. A. Distribution of maximum room occupancy in persons for the 100 rooms in the study. B. Room**

occupancy versus volume in ft3. Most rooms had ceiling heights of 9–10 feet, and the relationship between room volume and area is close to linear. Larger rooms had higher occupancy levels. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g002)

with inline MERV-13 filters installed to mitigate SARS-CoV-2 transmission from recirculating air. The HVAC systems in two other buildings had MERV-11 filters as the blowers were not able to overcome the higher filter resistance from MERV-13 filters. The distribution of maxi- mum room occupancy is shown in Fig 2A. Room dimensions were measured, with mean room area 752 ± 492 ft2, and mean ceiling heights 8.6 ± 2.0 ft. As expected, peak room occu- pancy varied linearly with room volume (Fig 2B). Windows remained closed in all classrooms during the measurements.

## CO2 level profiles

Time series measurements of room CO2 for the 98 rooms analyzed showed an expected increase in CO2 concentrations during the day, with a decline overnight to baseline. Several patterns were evident (Fig 3A), including a simple peak-trough, dual peak-troughs, and multi- ple peak-trough pairs. We then examined if peak CO2 levels in each room could be correlated with room volume (Fig 3B), air changes per hour calculated from each peak-trough pair (Fig 3C), or maximum room occupancy (Fig 3D). No obvious correlations were present, likely due to the variation in ventilation systems and room types among the 3 buildings.

## Room CO2 concentrations

CO2 levels 2500 ppm have been shown to decrease cognitive task performance in neurotypi- cal adults on standard test instruments \[37, 38\]. We were therefore interested in the amount of time each room’s CO2 concentrations were within four different ranges of CO2 during an 8 hour school day (7AM—3PM). Several patterns were evident (Fig 4. Rooms in Group 1 (n = 18) remained within the recommended values of CO2 (1000 ppm) \[5\] throughout the entire period. In contrast rooms in Group 2 (n = 74) had CO2 levels of 1001–2000 ppm, which have been shown to cause drowsiness and modest decreases in performance of cognitive tasks in neurotypical adults \[37, 38\] and children \[39–42\]. Of note, occupants of rooms in Group 3

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 6 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

**Fig 3. CO2 concentration measurements over time in school rooms. A. Selected patterns of CO2** concentration over the school day. Color coding indicates CO2

concentration stratification by concentration bands commonly used by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Cooling Engineers (ASHRAE) (green, < 1,000 ppm; yellow 1,000—2,000 ppm; red, 2,000 ppm). Minimum (blue) and maximum (red) CO2 concentration versus B. Room volume, C. Estimated ACH, and D. Maximum room occupancy. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g003)

(n = 6; 2001–3000 ppm) and Group 4 (n = 2; 3000 ppm) had approximately 1–6 hours at moderately high CO2 levels, although still below the OSHA occupational limits of 5000 ppm. We confirmed the elevated CO2 levels in Group 3 and 4 rooms with 3 more full day time series measurements. We also investigated whether the maximum CO2 concentrations observed in each room correlated with functional room type and building. Several different functional room types were present among the 3 buildings: classroom, therapy, treatment, activity, gym, office, kitchen, break, copy, music, and technology. Classrooms generally are occupied during the day by 7–8 students, 1 teacher, and 2–4 aids, with activity levels that produce moderate amounts of CO2. In contrast, music, activity, and gym rooms all have activities that may gener- ate larger emissions of CO2. Each building also has a different type and vintage of HVAC sys- tem, with potential variation in ventilation. To assess the distribution of peak CO2 values, we sorted rooms by type and building, as shown in Fig 5. Note that building B had the widest dis- tribution of maximum measured CO2 values, and these were found in classrooms. While a number of the measured CO2 concentrations were above the ASHRAE guidelines for class- rooms for varying periods of time \[5\], none exceeded OSHA’s exposure limits \[43\].

## Temperature versus CO2 relationship

The heating HVAC systems for each of the 3 buildings had zone heating and cooling. Two buildings were described as single stage, with mechanical room ventilation occurring only when the room needed to be heated or cooled, while one was described as dual stage, with both a baseline level of ventilation and then increased airflow when heating or cooling was

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 7 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

**Fig 4. CO2 level exposure. The distribution of CO2** exposure during an 8 hour school day. Stacked plots indicate the amount of time spent at each CO2 level during the

school day. Horizontal grid lines indicate quartiles. Each bar represents a room, with labels coded by building. Rooms are labeled by function: classroom, therapy, treatment, activity, gym, office, kitchen, break, copy, music, and technology.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g004)

**Fig 5. Peak CO2 levels by room functional type and building. Each plot displays a density distribution, along with**

individual measurements, for the room types indicated. Horizontal grid lines indicate ranges of CO2 which are acceptable (green), moderately elevated (yellow), and high (red). Distributions for room types are further categorized by building.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g005)

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 8 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

**Fig 6. CO2 levels and room temperature. Plots of CO2** levels (left axis) and temperature (right axis) showing

representative room patterns. (A-C) show rooms that had CO2 levels 2000 ppm, (D-F) had CO2 peak levels 1000– 2000 ppm, and (G-I) had CO21000 from 7AM-7PM. CO2 are coded by 1,000 ppm (green), 1,000–2,000 ppm (yellow), and > 2,000 ppm (red). Temperature is represented by the blue line. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g006](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g006)

required. CO2 values are a function of both ongoing production and ventilation. We hypothe- sized that room CO2 measurements would decrease during periods when the HVAC system was activated during room occupancy. Fig 6 shows superimposed plots of CO2 levels and tem- perature readings over time in a representative sample of 9 out of 100 rooms. Note the oscilla- tions in temperature as the heating system engages (e.g. Fig 6A, 6E, 6F and 6I) in some rooms. Of note, Fig 6 panels C,E,F and I all show instances where the temperatures increased rapidly, indicating active mechanical heating and ventilation, with a corresponding decline in room CO2 levels. These findings suggest that, at ambient temperatures above (in winter) or below (in summer) the thermostat set point, HVAC cycling coupled to temperature regulation may

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 9 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

**Fig 7. Estimates of air changes per hour (ACH). (A) Distribution of estimated ACH. Only four rooms had an estimated ACH 2.0. The recommended ACH for**

schools is 4.0 exchanges of fresh air per hour \[5, 9\]. (B) Each ACH measure was used to model the decrease in CO2 levels over time from a starting concentration of 1200 ppm CO2 (gray lines). Colored reference lines show expected CO2 clearance with 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 ACH. (C) Estimated room ACH plotted against recommended ACH for each room based maximum room occupancy as recommended for school rooms American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air- Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) standard 61.1 calculated from room area and occupancy \[5\]. Dashed line is where ACH _measured_ = ACH _recommended_. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g007](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g007)

have decreased CO2 clearance, since the blowers circulate air at higher flow rates only when temperatures fell outside of the thermostat set point.

## Air changes per hour estimates

Using the CO2 level profiles for each room, we derived air changes per hour (ACH) by fitting an exponential decay model to the time series segments where ΔCO2120ppm between peak and trough in a decay segment (S1 Fig). The distribution of ACH values is shown in Fig 7A, stratified by very low (red; ACH1.0), low (yellow; ACH 1.0–2.0), and moderately acceptable ACH2.0). All were less than the recommended ACH level of 4.0 \[5\]. Fig 7B demonstrates clearance of a 1200 ppm CO2 load at the estimated ACH for each room. Clearance times of 4–9 hours were consistent with measured, overnight, CO2 level declines. Finally, we compared the measured ACH values for each room with the minimum ACH recommended based on maximal room occupancy and measured room area and volume (Fig 7C. The estimate of rec- ommended ACH based on table 6–1 in the ASHRAE guidelines (Classrooms; ages 5 to 8) \[5\] require an air flow 10 ft3 min −1 per person and 0.12 ft3 min −1 per ft2 of area. The air flow was divided by the room volume to obtain recommended ACH. This calculation may underesti- mate required air flow, and thus recommended ACH, as it does not account for re-mixing of outside (i.e. fresh) air (20%) and recirculated air (80%) used by the HVAC systems.

## Incidence of SARS-CoV-2-positive PCR tests

We next sought to determine if rooms with lower ACH had higher numbers of SARS-CoV-2 infections (Fig 8), and whether MERV-13 filters altered this result. During the COVID-19 pan- demic, the use of high efficiency inline particle filters (e.g. MERV-13) were recommended to improve filtration of SARS-CoV-2 within HVAC systems \[2, 8–10\]. Higher filter efficiency, however, often results in lower ventilation rates and greater strain on the HVAC mechanical blowers such that older HVAC systems may not accommodate MERV-13 filters. In this school, two building HVAC systems could not provide the higher mechanical load required to circu- late air through MERV-13 filters, and continued to use MERV-11 filters. We first gathered data for a 1-year period for positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR test counts per classroom for those

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 10 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

**Fig 8. Positive PCR tests per room. (A) Difference in PCR tests per room, normalized by room occupancy, between rooms with HVAC systems using MERV-11 (red)**

versus MERV-13 filters. Statistical comparison with the Mann-Whitney U-test (p<0.0012). (B) The time in each room where the ambient CO2 1,000 ppm was plotted against positive PCR tests in that room normalized by mean room occupancy. Rooms with CO2 1,000 ppm for the entire day were excluded (lighter markers). MERV filter status for the building rooms is shown (red, MERV-11; blue, MERV-13). Linear regression (dashed line) had an R2 = 0.46, with an R2 = 0.4537 explaining 45% of the variance. (C) ACH versus positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR tests per room normalized to room occupancy. No statistically significant correlation was found (R2 = 0.0036). [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g008](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840.g008)

rooms that had measurements of CO2 levels, estimates of ACH, and MERV filter data. Positive PCR tests were normalized to mean classroom occupancy. A comparison of rooms with MERV-11 filters demonstrates that they have a higher occupancy normalized positive PCR tests per room compared to rooms with MERV-13 filters (Fig 8A). Next, total hours of CO2 levels 1,000 ppm were tabulated for each room. A significant correlation was found between hours of classroom CO2 levels 1,000 ppm and the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection (Spearman rank correlation; p = 0.01937, ρ = 0.2864). Lastly, no statistically significant correla- tion was found between estimated ACH and the incidence of positive PCR tests normalized to mean classroom occupancy.

**Discussion**

Our overall findings revealed only a small number of PCR-detected SARS-CoV-2 cases in this IDD school over the course of one year. Our finding that less than 20% of staff and students had PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections is in agreement with other school studies. Investi- gators in Norway \[17\], Germany \[44\], Italy \[13\], United States \[45–47\] and Ireland \[16\] found minimal or no evidence for in-school SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Although there have been reports of small secondary infection clusters \[14, 48\], larger studies have concluded that, over- all, schools were unlikely to be a major factor in the pandemic spread \[18\]. Although one retro- spective cohort study in Italy found that schools with mechanical ventilation had a 78% lower incidence of SARS-CoV-2 cases, their findings may have limited applicability in geographic regions where seasonal heating and cooling is necessary. Additionally, the conditions in IDD schools are likely somewhat different than public schools reported in the above publications. In the school studied in this work, only 30% of the students were able to tolerate masking, while all of the professional staff was masked. Thus, further study of the combined effects of mitigation measures is needed. Using CO2 levels to estimate ACH, we found that the school ventilation systems did not achieve ACH 4, which is consistent with other reports \[49–52\]. However, the use of CO2 measurements to derive ACH comes with several important caveats \[53\]. To fit exponential decay models to CO2 concentrations, a sufficient decay time is needed after CO2 loading \[27, 54\]. In this study, the CO2 concentration decay phases occurred at the end of the school day

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 11 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

and overnight. However, the HVAC systems had slightly different temperature set-points at night, which may have led to different ventilation rates, underestimating daytime ACH \[27\]. In addition, the HVAC systems were set primarily to maintain temperature, and thus higher CO2 concentrations may have been due to lower air circulation when the heat generated by room occupancy decreased the need for higher rates of heated air circulation \[27\]. Ventilation rates can also vary in both naturally- and mechanically-ventilated buildings, depending the indoor-outdoor temperature difference, wind speed, heating and cooling load, building enve- lope leakage, and other factors that may change over time \[27, 54\]. Our measurements were performed in the winter season (November) over 3 contiguous days, when heating was neces- sary due to outside temperatures, which is relevant to both HVAC use and the respiratory virus season in the northern hemisphere. These factors suggest that use of CO2 level ranges normalized to occupancy, with the above caveats, may be a practical method to estimate venti- lation adequacy in schools than CO2 derived ACH measures. Many have suggested that CO2 monitoring could be used as a surrogate for adequate venti- lation \[27, 54–58\]. While the primary goal of this work was to provide an estimate of the corre- lation between SARS-CoV-2 infections and room ventilation in an IDD school, elevated CO2 concentrations on their own may decrease cognitive task performance \[37, 39–42, 59\], concen- tration \[60\], increase cough and rhinitis \[61\], and teacher’s reporting of health symptoms (e.g. fatigue, headache) \[32\]. Especially in schools for IDD students, improving ventilation, and achieving recommended CO2 levels is likely to be important for school attendance \[62\], learn- ing, and cognitive task performance \[63, 64\]. Monitoring CO2 levels would provide real-time data in classrooms, and could be used to motivate interventions to improve ventilation and decrease CO2 levels, from simple measures such as opening windows when possible to large- scale upgrades of school HVAC systems. Such measures should, however, be correlated with more rigorous measures of ventilation to account for numerous factors important for interpre- tation of the results \[53\]. Finally, it is important to note that we did not measure individual exposure over time to CO2 concentrations, but rather concentrations in rooms. Individuals generally move between classrooms, therapy rooms, the outdoors, and other school areas, although less so during COVID. This study also highlights the potential trade-offs in terms of improving in-line filtration and ventilation of particles and droplets to prevent infection and the potential expense required to upgrade HVAC systems in many schools \[49\]. Circulating air through a higher resistance particulate filter may not be possible for many older HVAC systems, requiring an expensive upgrade. In addition, filters may decrease ventilation rates, raising ambient CO2, particulate, and volatile organic compound concentrations. Increasing the percentage of out- door air brought in creates a trade-off between improved ventilation and the need to heat, cool, and condition the humidity of the incoming fresh air, increasing energy costs \[37, 65\]. Similarly, for IDD schools, measures such as opening windows create another trade off between improved ventilation and student safety. Given the vintage of most public school buildings and HVAC systems, as well as the budgets available for upgrades and remediation measures, this issue may benefit from more public funding and policy discussions. One goal of community engaged research partnerships is to have direct impact on improv- ing outcomes highly valued by the community. The comprehensive sampling in 100 rooms across 3 buildings revealed a wide variation in ventilation rates, as well as number of hours exposed to CO2 levels greater than 1,000 ppm. Only 8 rooms had levels of CO2 2,000 ppm for more than 30–130 minutes over the course of a school day, and of those 7 of 8 rooms were in the same building. These findings were subsequently validated by an independent HVAC contractor engaged by the school. Of note, the rooms with ventilation served by HVAC sys- tems with MERV-13 filters had lower rates of PCR test positives for SARS-CoV-2. Overall,

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 12 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

these results have sparked discussion about upgrade of the ventilation systems. The school continues to seek state and federal funding in an on-going effort to ensure and exceed the ven- tilation standards recommended for schools.

**Conclusions**

There was a statistically significant correlation between rooms with CO2 levels 1,000 ppm and SARS-CoV-2 cases in an IDD school. Rooms served by HVAC systems with in-line MERV-13 filters had a lower incidence of SARS-CoV-2-positive PCR tests. This research part- nership identified areas for improving in-school ventilation and the use of in-line, high effi- ciency air filtration.

## Supporting information

## S1 Fig. ACH curve fitting results for each room in the study.

(PDF)

## S1 File. A CSV file containing data with room characteristics, including building, square

## footage and volume, occupancy, CO2 concentration times, SARS-CoV-2 PCR positive sub-

## jects per room.

(CSV)

## S2 File. A CSV file containing the time series CO2 concentration data from each room

## used to derive the ACH estimates.

(CSV)

**Acknowledgments**

The authors would like to thank the Mary Cariola Center school community for their enthusi- astic support and extensive partnership in this work. The authors would also like to thank the technologists of the UR Medicine Central Laboratory for their rapid performance of SARS- CoV-2 PCR tests. We are very grateful for Dr. Philip K. Hopke’s (University of Rochester) expert guidance on the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) standards for schools, CO2 measurements and ACH calculations, and his critical reading of the manuscript. The inspiration for CO2 measurements came from the outstanding social media videos of Dr. Katrine Wallace (University of Illinois; @epidemiolo- gistkat). Research reported in this Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics—Underserved Popula- tions (RADx-UP) publication was supported by the National Institutes of Health under OT2 HD107553. This work was also supported by the University of Rochester Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center (P50 HD103536) from the NIH Eunice Kennedy Shriver Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and the University of Rochester Clinical and Translational Science Award (UL1 TR002001) from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

## Author Contributions

## Conceptualization: Martin S. Zand, Samantha Spallina, Alexis Ross, Karen Zandi.

## Data curation: Martin S. Zand, Samantha Spallina, Alexis Ross.

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 13 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Ventilation during COVID-19 in a school for students with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD)

## Formal analysis: Martin S. Zand, Samantha Spallina, Alexis Ross, Anne Pawlowski, Christo-

pher L. Seplaki, Jonathan Herington, Anthony M. Corbett, Kimberly Kaukeinen, Lisette Alcantara, Andrew Cameron.

## Funding acquisition: Martin S. Zand.

## Investigation: Martin S. Zand, Anne Pawlowski.

## Methodology: Martin S. Zand, Samantha Spallina, Alexis Ross, Anne Pawlowski, Christopher

L. Seplaki, Anthony M. Corbett, Kimberly Kaukeinen, Jeanne Holden-Wiltse, Dongmei Li, Andrew Cameron.

## Project administration: Martin S. Zand, Alexis Ross, Karen Zandi, Nicole Beaumont.

## Resources: Martin S. Zand, Anthony M. Corbett, Kimberly Kaukeinen, Jeanne Holden-

Wiltse.

## Software: Martin S. Zand, Kimberly Kaukeinen, Jeanne Holden-Wiltse.

## Supervision: Martin S. Zand, Karen Zandi, Edward G. Freedman.

## Validation: Martin S. Zand, Samantha Spallina, Alexis Ross, Anne Pawlowski, Anthony M.

Corbett, Kimberly Kaukeinen.

## Visualization: Martin S. Zand, Jonathan Herington, Anthony M. Corbett.

## Writing – original draft: Martin S. Zand.

## Writing – review & editing: Samantha Spallina, Alexis Ross, Karen Zandi, Anne Pawlowski,

Christopher L. Seplaki, Jonathan Herington, Anthony M. Corbett, Kimberly Kaukeinen, Jeanne Holden-Wiltse, Edward G. Freedman, Dongmei Li, Andrew Cameron, Nicole Beau- mont, Ann Dozier, Stephen Dewhurst, John J. Foxe.

**References**

**1.** Brass A, Shoubridge AP, Larby N, Elms L, Sims SK, Flynn E, et al. Targeted reduction of airborne viral transmission risk in long-term residential aged care. Age Ageing. 2022; 51(12):afac316. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.1093/ageing/afac316 PMID: 36580555
**2.** Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ventilation in Buildings and Vehicles to Prevent the Spread of COVID-19; 2021. CDC website. Available from: [https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/) community/schools-childcare/ventilation.html.
**3.** Buonanno G, Ricolfi L, Morawska L, Stabile L. Increasing ventilation reduces SARS-CoV-2 airborne transmission in schools: A retrospective cohort study in Italy’s Marche region. Frontiers in Public Health. 2022; 10:1087087. [https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1087087](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1087087) PMID: 36568748
**4.** Guzman MI. An overview of the effect of bioaerosol size in coronavirus disease 2019 transmission. The International Journal of Health Planning and Management. 2021; 36(2):257–266. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10). 1002/hpm.3095 PMID: 33295073
**5.** ANSI/ASHRAE standard 62.1-2022: Ventilation for acceptable indoor air quality. Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers; 2022.
**6.** Rodriguez D, Urbieta IR, Velasco A, Campano-Laborda MA, Jimenez E. Assessment of indoor air qual- ity and risk of COVID-19 infection in Spanish secondary school and university classrooms. Build Envi- ron. 2022; 226:109717. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2022.109717](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2022.109717) PMID: 36313012
**7.** Schibuola L, Tambani C. High energy efficiency ventilation to limit COVID-19 contagion in school envi- ronments. Energy Build. 2021; 240:110882. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2021.110882](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2021.110882) PMID: 33716389
**8.** Pampati S, Rasberry CN, McConnell L, Timpe Z, Lee S, Spencer P, et al. Ventilation Improvement Strategies Among K-12 Public Schools—The National School COVID-19 Prevention Study, United States, February 14-March 27, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2022; 71(23):770–775. https:// doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7123e2 PMID: 35679198
**9.** Bahnfleth W. Epidemic Task Force Core Recommendations. ASHRAE Journal. 2021; 63(7):8–9.
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291840) April 3, 2024 14 / 17

* * *

10. Jones E, Young A, Clevenger K, Salimifard P, Wu E, Luna ML, et al. Healthy schools: risk reduction
    strategies for reopening schools. Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health Healthy Buildings program.
    2020;.
11. Konstantinou C, Constantinou A, Kleovoulou EG, Kyriacou A, Kakoulli C, Milis G, et al. Assessment of
    indoor and outdoor air quality in primary schools of Cyprus during the COVID-19 pandemic measures in
    May-July 2021. Heliyon. 2022; 8(5):e09354. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e09354](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e09354) PMID:
    35529701
12. Stabile L, Dell’Isola M, Frattolillo A, Massimo A, Russi A. Effect of natural ventilation and manual airing
    on indoor air quality in naturally ventilated Italian classrooms. Building and Environment. 2016; 98:180–
13. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.01.009)
14. Larosa E, Djuric O, Cassinadri M, Cilloni S, Bisaccia E, Vicentini M, et al. Secondary transmission of
    COVID-19 in preschool and school settings in northern Italy after their reopening in September 2020: a
    population-based study. Euro Surveill. 2020; 25(49):pii=2001911. [https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917).
    ES.2020.25.49.2001911 PMID: 33303065
15. Stein-Zamir C, Abramson N, Shoob H, Libal E, Bitan M, Cardash T, et al. A large COVID-19 outbreak in
    a high school 10 days after schools’ reopening, Israel, May 2020. Euro Surveill. 2020; 25(29). https://
    doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.29.2001352 PMID: 32720636
16. Macartney K, Quinn HE, Pillsbury AJ, Koirala A, Deng L, Winkler N, et al. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2
    in Australian educational settings: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2020; 4
    (11):807–816. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30251-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30251-0) PMID: 32758454
17. Heavey L, Casey G, Kelly C, Kelly D, McDarby G. No evidence of secondary transmission of COVID-19
    from children attending school in Ireland, 2020. Euro Surveill. 2020; 25(21). [https://doi.org/10.2807/](https://doi.org/10.2807/)
    1560-7917.ES.2020.25.21.2000903 PMID: 32489179
18. Rotevatn TA, Larsen VB, Johansen TB, Astrup E, Sure´ n P, Greve-Isdahl M, et al. Transmission of
    SARS-CoV-2 in Norwegian schools during academic year 2020-21: population wide, register based
    cohort study. BMJ Medicine. 2022; 1(1). [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjmed-2021-000026](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjmed-2021-000026) PMID:
    36936575
19. Ludvigsson JF. Children are unlikely to be the main drivers of the COVID-19 pandemic—A systematic
    review. Acta Paediatr. 2020; 109(8):1525–1530. [https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.15371](https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.15371) PMID: 32430964
20. Espinosa JM. Down Syndrome and COVID-19: A Perfect Storm? Cell Rep Med. 2020; 1(2):100019.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100019) PMID: 32501455
21. Fois A, Boucher-Lafleur AM, Thompson Legault J, Renaud C, Morin C, Des Rosiers C, et al. Humoral
    responses to the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine are impaired in Leigh Syndrome French Canadian patients. PLoS One. 2020; 15(10):e0239860. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239860](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239860) PMID:
    33085679
22. Frans G, Meyts I, Devriendt K, Liston A, Vermeulen F, Bossuyt X. Mild humoral immunodeficiency in a
    patient with X-linked Kabuki syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2016; 170(3):801–3. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1002/ajmg.a.37499 PMID: 26701671
23. Heuer L, Ashwood P, Schauer J, Goines P, Krakowiak P, Hertz-Picciotto I, et al. Reduced levels of
    immunoglobulin in children with autism correlates with behavioral symptoms. Autism Res. 2008; 1
    (5):275–83. [https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.42](https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.42) PMID: 19343198
24. Kennedy RB, Ovsyannikova IG, Haralambieva IH, Lambert ND, Pankratz VS, Poland GA. Genomewide SNP associations with rubella-specific cytokine responses in measles-mumps-rubella vaccine
    recipients. Immunogenetics. 2014; 66(7-8):493–9. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s00251-014-0776-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00251-014-0776-3) PMID:
    24811271
25. Turk MA, Landes SD, Formica MK, Goss KD. Intellectual and developmental disability and COVID-19
    case-fatality trends: TriNetX analysis. Disabil Health J. 2020; 13(3):100942. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j](https://doi.org/10.1016/j).
    dhjo.2020.100942 PMID: 32473875
26. Sherby MR, Kalb LG, Coller RJ, DeMuri GP, Butteris S, Foxe JJ, et al. Supporting COVID-19 School
    Safety for Children With Disabilities and Medical Complexity. Pediatrics. 2022; 149(12 Suppl 2). https://
    doi.org/10.1542/peds.2021-054268H PMID: 34737172
27. Sonnenschein S, Stites ML, Grossman JA, Galczyk SH. “This will likely affect his entire life”: Parents’
    views of special education services during COVID-19. International Journal of Educational Research.
    2022; 112:101941. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2022.101941](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2022.101941) PMID: 35136282
28. Batterman S. Review and Extension of CO(2)-Based Methods to Determine Ventilation Rates with
    Application to School Classrooms. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017; 14(2). [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/)
    ijerph14020145
29. Stabile L, Pacitto A, Mikszewski A, Morawska L, Buonanno G. Ventilation procedures to minimize the
    airborne transmission of viruses in classrooms. Build Environ. 2021; 202:108042. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1016/j.buildenv.2021.108042 PMID: 34127877

* * *

29. Catalina T, Ghita SA, Popescu LL, Popescu R. Survey and Measurements of Indoor Environmental
    Quality in Urban/Rural Schools Located in Romania. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022; 19(16).
    [https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph191610219](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph191610219) PMID: 36011851
30. Rosbach J, Krop E, Vonk M, van Ginkel J, Meliefste C, de Wind S, et al. Classroom ventilation and
    indoor air quality-results from the FRESH intervention study. Indoor Air. 2016; 26(4):538–45. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1111/ina.12231 PMID: 26171647
31. Ferreira AM, Cardoso M. Indoor air quality and health in schools. J Bras Pneumol. 2014; 40(3):259–68.
    [https://doi.org/10.1590/S1806-37132014000300009](https://doi.org/10.1590/S1806-37132014000300009) PMID: 25029649
32. Muscatiello N, McCarthy A, Kielb C, Hsu WH, Hwang SA, Lin S. Classroom conditions and CO2 concentrations and teacher health symptom reporting in 10 New York State Schools. Indoor Air. 2015; 25
    (2):157–67. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12136](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12136) PMID: 24920413
33. Kabirikopaei A, Lau J, Nord J, Bovaird J. Identifying the K-12 classrooms’ indoor air quality factors that
    affect student academic performance. Sci Total Environ. 2021; 786:147498. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j](https://doi.org/10.1016/j).
    scitotenv.2021.147498 PMID: 33975113
34. Sahin C, Rastgeldi Dogan T, Yildiz M, Sofuoglu SC. Indoor environmental quality in naturally ventilated
    schools of a dusty region: Excess health risks and effect of heating and desert dust transport. Indoor
    Air. 2022; 32(7):e13068. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.13068](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.13068) PMID: 35904387
35. Zaeh SE, Koehler K, Eakin MN, Wohn C, Diibor I, Eckmann T, et al. Indoor Air Quality Prior to and Following School Building Renovation in a Mid-Atlantic School District. Int J Environ Res Public Health.
    2021; 18(22). [https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182212149](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182212149) PMID: 34831903
36. Morse RG, Haas P, Lattanzio SM, Zehnter D, Divine M. A cross-sectional study of schools for compliance to ventilation rate requirements. Journal of Chemical Health and Safety. 2009; 16(6):4–10. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.jchas.2009.02.001
37. Satish U, Mendell MJ, Shekhar K, Hotchi T, Sullivan D, Streufert S, et al. Is CO2 an indoor pollutant?
    Direct effects of low-to-moderate CO2 concentrations on human decision-making performance.
    Environ Health Perspect. 2012; 120(12):1671–7. [https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104789](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104789) PMID:
    23008272
38. Allen JG, MacNaughton P, Satish U, Santanam S, Vallarino J, Spengler JD. Associations of Cognitive
    Function Scores with Carbon Dioxide, Ventilation, and Volatile Organic Compound Exposures in Office
    Workers: A Controlled Exposure Study of Green and Conventional Office Environments. Environ Health
    Perspect. 2016; 124(6):805–12. [https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1510037](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1510037) PMID: 26502459
39. Bogdanovica S, Zemitis J, Bogdanovics R. The Effect of CO2 Concentration on Children’s Well-
    Being during the Process of Learning. Energies. 2020; 13(22):6099. [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/)
    en13226099
40. Petersen S, Jensen KL, Pedersen ALS, Rasmussen HS. The effect of increased classroom ventilation
    rate indicated by reduced CO2 concentration on the performance of schoolwork by children. Indoor Air.
    2016; 26(3):366–379. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12210](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12210) PMID: 25866236
41. Wargocki P, Porras-Salazar JA, Contreras-Espinoza S, Bahnfleth W. The relationships between classroom air quality and children’s performance in school. Building and Environment. 2020; 173:106749.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.106749](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.106749)
42. Wargocki P, Wyon D. The Effects of Outdoor Air Supply Rate and Supply Air Filter Condition in Classrooms on the Performance of Schoolwork by Children (RP1257). HVAC Research. 2007; 13:165–191.
    [https://doi.org/10.1080/10789669.2007.10390950](https://doi.org/10.1080/10789669.2007.10390950)
43. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Permissible Exposure Limits (PELS) from 29
    CFR 1910.1000 Table Z-1; 2016. [https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/](https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/)
    1910.1000.
44. Ehrhardt J, Ekinci A, Krehl H, Meincke M, Finci I, Klein J, et al. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in children
    aged 0 to 19 years in childcare facilities and schools after their reopening in May 2020, Baden-Wu¨ rttemberg, Germany. Euro Surveill. 2020; 25(36). [https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.36](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.36).
    2001587 PMID: 32914746
45. Hershow R, Wu K, Lewis N, et al. Low SARS-CoV-2 transmission in elementary schools—Salt Lake
    County, Utah, December 3, 2020-January 31, 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021; 70(12):442–
46. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7012e3](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7012e3) PMID: 33764967
47. Falk A, Benda A, Falk P, Steffen S, Wallace Z, Høeg T. COVID-19 cases and transmission in 17 K-12
    schools—Wood County, Wisconsin, August 31-November 29, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
    2021; 70(4):136–140. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7004e3](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7004e3) PMID: 33507890
48. Zimmerman K, Akinboyo I, Brookhart M, et al, Collaborative AS. Incidence and secondary transmission
    of SARS-CoV-2 infections in schools. Pediatrics. 2021; 147(4):e2020048090. [https://doi.org/10.1542/](https://doi.org/10.1542/)
    peds.2020-048090 PMID: 33419869

* * *

48. Ismail SA, Saliba V, Lopez Bernal JA, Ramsay ME, Ladhani SN. SARS-CoV-2 infection and transmission in educational settings: cross-sectional analysis of clusters and outbreaks in England. MedRxiv.
49. [https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248226](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248226) PMID: 33398295
50. Fisk WJ. The ventilation problem in schools: literature review. Indoor air. 2017; 27(6):1039–1051.
    [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12403](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12403) PMID: 28683161
51. Abou Taleb MA, Mohamed MF, Nofal FH, Noweir KH, El-Barawy MA. Indoor air quality of schools in
    Alexandria City. J Egypt Public Health Assoc. 2002; 77(3-4):307–28. PMID: 17216965
52. Godwin C, Batterman S. Indoor air quality in Michigan schools. Indoor Air. 2007; 17(2):109–21. https://
    doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2006.00459.x PMID: 17391233
53. Rosbach JT, Vonk M, Duijm F, van Ginkel JT, Gehring U, Brunekreef B. A ventilation intervention study
    in classrooms to improve indoor air quality: the FRESH study. Environ Health. 2013; 12:110. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1186/1476-069X-12-110 PMID: 24345039
54. ASHRAE Position Document on Indoor Carbon Dioxide. Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating,
    Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers; 2022. Available from: [https://www.ashrae.org/file%](https://www.ashrae.org/file%)
    20library/about/position%20documents/pd\_indoorcarbondioxide\_2022.pdf.
55. Scheff PA, Paulius VK, Huang SW, Conroy LM. Indoor air quality in a middle school, Part I: Use of CO2
    as a tracer for effective ventilation. Appl Occup Environ Hyg. 2000; 15(11):824–34. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1080/10473220050175706 PMID: 11062927
56. Hou D, Wang LL, Katal A, Yan S, Zhou LG, Wang V, et al. Development of a Bayesian inference model
    for assessing ventilation condition based on CO2 meters in primary schools. Build Simul. 2022; p. 1–17.
    [https://doi.org/10.1007/s12273-022-0926-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12273-022-0926-8) PMID: 36035815
57. Adzic F, Roberts BM, Hathway EA, Kaur Matharu R, Ciric L, Wild O, et al. A post-occupancy study of
    ventilation effectiveness from high-resolution CO2 monitoring at live theatre events to mitigate airborne
    transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Build Environ. 2022; 223:109392. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv).
    2022.109392 PMID: 35937085
58. Bauer K, Hardege R, Neumann S, Schwarze R, Fuchs M, Heinrich Pieper L. How Safe is Singing Under
    Pandemic Conditions?—CO(2)-Measurements as Simple Method for Risk Estimation During Choir
    Rehearsals. J Voice. 2022. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvoice.2022.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvoice.2022.05.003) PMID: 35667988
59. Aguilar AJ, de la Hoz-Torres ML, Martinez-Aires MD, Ruiz DP. Monitoring and Assessment of Indoor
    Environmental Conditions after the Implementation of COVID-19-Based Ventilation Strategies in an
    Educational Building in Southern Spain. Sensors (Basel). 2021; 21(21). [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/)
    s21217223
60. Zhang X, Wargocki P, Lian Z, Thyregod C. Effects of exposure to carbon dioxide and bioeffluents on
    perceived air quality, self-assessed acute health symptoms, and cognitive performance. Indoor air.
    2017; 27(1):47–64. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12284](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12284) PMID: 26825447
61. Twardella D, Matzen W, Lahrz T, Burghardt R, Spegel H, Hendrowarsito L, et al. Effect of classroom air
    quality on students’ concentration: results of a cluster-randomized cross-over experimental study.
    Indoor air. 2012; 22(5):378–387. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2012.00774.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2012.00774.x) PMID: 22364552
62. Simoni M, Annesi-Maesano I, Sigsgaard T, Norback D, Wieslander G, Nystad W, et al. School air quality related to dry cough, rhinitis and nasal patency in children. European Respiratory Journal. 2010; 35
    (4):742–749. [https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.00016309](https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.00016309) PMID: 20075060
63. Gaihre S, Semple S, Miller J, Fielding S, Turner S. Classroom carbon dioxide concentration, school
    attendance, and educational attainment. J Sch Health. 2014; 84(9):569–74. [https://doi.org/10.1111/](https://doi.org/10.1111/)
    josh.12183 PMID: 25117890
64. Du B, Tandoc MC, Mack ML, Siegel JA. Indoor CO(2) concentrations and cognitive function: A critical
    review. Indoor Air. 2020; 30(6):1067–1082. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12706](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12706) PMID: 32557862
65. Kajtar L, Herczeg L. Influence of carbon-dioxide concentration on human well-being and intensity of
    mental work. Idojaras. 2012; 116(2):145–169.
66. Santos HRR, Leal VMS. Energy vs. ventilation rate in buildings: A comprehensive scenario-based
    assessment in the European context. Energy and Buildings. 2012; 54:111–121. [https://doi.org/10.1016/](https://doi.org/10.1016/)
    j.enbuild.2012.07.040