RESEARCH ARTICLE

Assessing ventilation through ambient carbon
dioxide concentrations across multiple
healthcare levels in Ghana

3,4
Cecilia CrewsID1, Paul AngwaawieID2, Alhassan Abdul-Mumin, Iddrisu Baba Yabasin5,
1,8,9
Evans AttivorID6, John Dibato7, Megan P. CoffeeID \*

OPEN ACCESS

1 Department of Population and Family Health, Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New
York, New York, United States of America, 2 Ghana Health Service, Health Directorate, Nkwanta South,
Ghana, 3 Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University for Development Studies School of Medicine,
Tamale, Ghana, 4 Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Tamale Teaching Hospital, Tamale, Ghana,
5 Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, University for Development Studies School of
Medicine, Tamale, Ghana, 6 Nkwanta South Municipal Health Directorate, Nkwanta South, Ghana,
7 Melbourne EpiCentre, Department of Medicine at Royal Melbourne Hospital, University of Melbourne and
Melbourne Health, Melbourne, Australia, 8 Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of
Medicine, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America, 9 Health Unit,
International Rescue Committee, New York, New York, United States of America

Citation: Crews C, Angwaawie P, Abdul-Mumin A,
Yabasin IB, Attivor E, Dibato J, et al. (2024)
Assessing ventilation through ambient carbon
dioxide concentrations across multiple healthcare
levels in Ghana. PLOS Glob Public Health 4(8):
e0003287. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal).
pgph.0003287

Received: February 26, 2024

- [megan.coffee@nyulangone.org](mailto:megan.coffee@nyulangone.org)

Accepted: June 26, 2024

Peer Review History: PLOS recognizes the
benefits of transparency in the peer review
process; therefore, we enable the publication of
all of the content of peer review and author
responses alongside final, published articles. The
editorial history of this article is available here:
[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287)

Abstract

Infection prevention and control (IPC) measures safeguard primary healthcare systems,
especially as the infectious disease landscape evolves due to climate and environmental
change, increased global mobility, and vaccine hesitancy and inequity, which can introduce
unexpected pathogens. This study explores the importance of an "always-on," low-cost IPC
approach, focusing on the role of natural ventilation in health facilities, particularly in lowresource settings. Ambient carbon dioxide (CO2) levels are increasingly used as a measure
of ventilation effectiveness allowing for spot checks and targeted ventilation improvements.
Data were collected through purposive sampling in Northern Ghana over a three-month
period. Levels of CO2 ppm (parts per million) were measured by a handheld device in various healthcare settings, including Community-Based Health Planning and Services (CHPS)
facilities, municipal and teaching hospitals, and community settings to assess ventilation
effectiveness. Analyses compared CO2 readings in community and hospital settings as well
as in those settings with and without natural ventilation. A total of 40 facilities were evaluated
in this study; 90% were healthcare facilities and 75% had natural ventilation (with an open
window, door or wall). Facilities that relied on natural ventilation were mostly community
health centers (60% vs 0%) and more commonly had patients present (83% vs 40%) compared with facilities without natural ventilation. Facilities with natural ventilation had significantly lower CO2 concentrations (CO2 ppm: 663 vs 1378, p = 0.0043) and were more likely
to meet international thresholds of CO2 < 800 ppm (87% vs 10%, p = <0.0001) and CO2 <
1000 ppm (97% vs 20%, p = <0.0001). The adjusted odds ratio of low CO2 in the natural
facilities compared with non-natural were: odds ratios, OR (95% CI): 21.7 (1.89, 247) for
CO2 < 800 ppm, and 16.8 (1.55, 183) for CO2 < 1000 ppm. Natural ventilation in these facilities was consistently significantly associated with higher likelihood of low CO2

\\mathrm{c{ _}O O_{2}<}

\ 0\_{2},\\up p p m

C0\_{2}<800

\\cdot\\mathrm{C O}\_{2}<1000

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Ventilation assessment in healthcare settings

A, Yabasin I b, Attivor E, Coffee M. Ambient carbon concentrations. Improved ventilation represents one cost-effective layer of IPC. This study dioxide concentrations in health facilities in Ghana highlights the continuing role natural ventilation can play in health facility design in commu- \[Internet\]. OSF; 7 May 2024. Available: osf.io/ 92thw. nity health care clinics. Most health facilities met standard CO2 thresholds, particularly in community health facilities. Further research is needed to optimize the use of natural ventila- **Funding: The authors received no specific funding** for this work. tion. The use of a handheld devices to track a simple metric, CO2 levels, could improve appreciation of ventilation among healthcare workers and public health professionals and **Competing interests: The authors have declared** that no competing interests exist. allow for them to target improvements. This study highlights potential lessons in the built environment of community primary health facilities as a blueprint for low-cost, integrated multi-layer IPC measures to mitigate respiratory illness and anticipate future outbreaks.

**Introduction**

Infection prevention and control (IPC) measures safeguard primary healthcare, the backbone of healthcare systems. An always-on, low-cost IPC approach is essential when diagnoses may be delayed and threats unrecognized, which may occur more frequently as emerging diseases caused by climate change—along with environmental changes, increased mobility, and vaccine hesitancy and inequity—transforms the infectious disease landscape, particularly in low resource settings. Effective IPC relies on layers of protection. The "hierarchy of control" or Swiss Cheese model layers engineering controls (such as building design and ventilation), administrative controls (triage, isolation, quarantine, IPC training and sick days), and personal protective equipment (PPE) to improve IPC effectiveness and reduce dependence on single factors, such as unpredictable supply chains and staffing changes \[1–4\]. Ventilation serves as one such always-on layer of protection against pathogens, particularly respiratory but also others, including aerosolized enteric pathogens. Improved ventilation has been used in health facilities against mycobacterium tuberculosis, a persistent healthcare setting risk and the single greatest cause of mortality from infectious diseases \[5\]; common respiratory viruses, including SARS-- CoV-2 and influenza \[3, 6\]; vaccine-preventable infections, such as measles and varicella \[7\]; and emerging climate-change-related infections, including zoonoses such as avian influenza or even fungal infections, including in laboratory settings \[8, 9\]. Improved ventilation outside of healthcare also reduces influenza cases and school absences due to illness \[10, 11\]. Outbreak response may involve costly outlay for constructing isolation units parallel to permanent pri- mary health infrastructure, but effectiveness relies on accurate diagnosis (underdiagnosis may expose healthcare providers; overdiagnosis may expose patients isolated together) \[12–14\]. Enhancing existing, always-on, cost-effective protective measures provides another layer of healthcare protection. As recommended by the WHO \[15\], improved ventilation has long been achieved through natural ventilation and incorporated into health facility design. Natural ventilation is the flow of outdoor air into and out of indoor spaces, relying on wind and buoyancy due to tempera- ture differences \[16\]. Such ventilation has long been known to reduce airborne tuberculosis (TB) transmission leading to purposeful design in health facilities to maximize this advantage \[5, 17–19\]. Natural ventilation can occur in several ways. Engineering solutions can manipu- late natural ventilation where heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) are not feasi- ble \[20\]. Louvered windows allow fresh air to protect against rain and debris \[21\]. This airflow can rely on a) single-sided ventilation (one-sided open windows), b) cross-ventilation (hori- zontal airflow), c) stack ventilation (vertical airflow relying on differences in temperature and

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287) August 14, 2024 2 / 16

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Ventilation assessment in healthcare settings

wind to allow air to enter from below and exit from above), and d) top-down ventilation \[22\]. Displacement ventilation (or stack ventilation) allows air to enter from below and be extracted from above, offering a potential measure, where negative-pressure isolation rooms are needed \[23\]. However, natural ventilation can depend on many factors including wind patterns, corridor design, ceiling height, floor level, and unplanned impediments like bookcases or boxes block- ing airflow \[24, 25\]. Windows may be closed for privacy (in labor and delivery ward), tempera- ture regulation (neonatal care), security, and to control mosquitoes, wildfire smoke, or industrial pollution \[26–28\]. Climate change, whose impact will be felt the most among those least responsible for its burden, will increase the need for an always-on IPC approach for emerging diseases in lower resourced settings, but may also affect the use of natural ventilation, given temperature changes and risk of wildfire and air pollution \[29\]. A clearer understanding of natural ventilation’s application and limitations will enable its more effective use in evolving contexts. Natural ventilation does not provide all the benefits of mechanical ventilation, as it is not as easily controlled and does not incorporate filtration. Natural ventilation in clinics may allow the entry of outdoor hazards, including disease-carrying mosquitoes and particulate matter, as well as smaller, infectious agents like fungal spores or even Brucella from an abattoir \[30–34\]. Larger hazards can be mitigated through the implementation of screens and fans. Reducing CO2 also deters mosquitoes, by reducing their attraction to the indoors, but filtering smaller hazards remains challenging \[31, 35, 36\]. Moreover, in West Africa, Harmattan and its sea- sonal dusty winds are associated with an increase in infections, including pneumococcal infec- tions, trachoma, or conjunctivitis, as dry air and dust particulates can irritate mucosal passages and are more difficult to filter and reduce the benefit of natural ventilation \[37–43\]. Ventilation has often been quantified through ACH (Air Changes per Hour) which mea- sures the number of times the air within a space is replaced with fresh air in one hour. ACH can be calculated by the decay in carbon dioxide (CO2) levels in a space over time. Increasingly steady-state CO2 levels measured in occupied indoor spaces have been used as a standalone measure of ventilation, although the limitations of this approach should be acknowledged \[44, 45\]. Certain national entities and professional organizations have established target levels, with most aiming for 1000 parts per million (ppm) as the upper limit of normal and others targeting 800 ppm \[46–50\]. Such measurement reflects occupancy and captures some of the risks associ- ated with exposure to higher numbers of individuals (and potentially infections) in an indoor space, as more people generate more CO2. Such CO2 levels will also depend on the size of the person and activity, which may be correlated with age and sex, but which may not correspond to infection risk \[45, 51–53\]. Further, the duration of viability of any specific infectious particle in the air is not captured by the CO2 level. It should be noted that as climate change intensifies, ambient environmental CO2 levels will increase and the lowest achievable health facility levels will rise slightly; in 2022, the average global atmospheric CO2 level was 417 ppm \[54\]. Although imperfect, such ventilation metrics can identify areas with a greater risk in rural and primary care facilities where closer monitoring and filtration systems are not feasible. This metric creates a tool that can be communicated with clinicians and other healthcare decision makers to identify weak points in healthcare systems and add extra layers of targeted IPC protection. Ghana’s robust primary healthcare system relies on decentralized community-based health planning and service (CHPS) facilities to bring patients’ first contact with a health provider closer to their communities. Referrals are made for higher-level care at municipal, regional, and teaching hospitals if needed \[55–57\]. Strengthening primary health care involves prevent- ing and treating illness at the community level, thereby decreasing resource constraints at

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287) August 14, 2024 3 / 16

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Ventilation assessment in healthcare settings

higher levels of care and reducing the spread of nosocomial infectious diseases in densely pop- ulated health facilities \[58\]. Improving the built environment of healthcare facilities at each level of care is a low-cost intervention for pursuing this goal and identifying weak points could reduce risk. In the Ghanaian context, previous research has assessed the levels of CO2 in hospi- tal facilities \[59\]; however, it is crucial to conduct further research at the CHPS level to under- stand the initial point of contact of an infectious disease with a larger health system and the community outside formal health facilities. Outdoor waiting areas can be better utilized and mechanized approaches can be considered where natural ventilation alone was insufficient \[60, 61\]. Lowering CO2 levels could reduce concerns about the spread of airborne or respira- tory infections; this would allow for a greater emphasis on addressing other service delivery needs \[51, 62–64\]. Here, we evaluated the CO2 levels and the design of primary, secondary, and tertiary health facilities, considering the first contact areas between those needing triage and treatment in Ghana’s health system, to determine whether built environments which uti- lized natural ventilation were correlated with adequate and lower CO2 levels.

## Materials and methods

Data points were captured using purposive sampling during interactions with health facilities in the Gushegu and Nkwanta South municipalities as well as the Tamale Metropolitan Assem- bly, over a 3-month period from June 16th to September 15 th , 2022, see catchment area in Fig

1. To improve resource efficiency, a convenience sampling frame limited site selection to the three municipalities that were accessible to researchers within the 3-month research period. Nested purposive sampling within the chosen municipalities selected a heterogenous distribu- tion of primary, secondary, and tertiary healthcare facilities that were 1) accessible to research- ers within a 1-hour travel radius from the metropolitan center of the municipality and 2) actively seeing patients on the day of the visit, so that data taken would more accurately approximate the average user experience during daytime operations. In Nkwanta South, the average temperature is 27˚C and ranges from 22˚C to 34˚C. The average humidity was 80%, which ranged from 56% to 90% during the time period. Wind- speed average measured at Tamale airport was 4mph, with a maximum of 12mph during this time period. The rainy season in Ghana is from April to mid-October \[65\]. Sampling included a variety of patient densities and types of facility areas, including CHPS facilities, municipal hospitals, and teaching hospitals. Field notes recorded qualitative assessments to accompany each data point, noting the facility (healthcare/non-healthcare), type of location (e.g., confer- ence center, obstetric theater), a rough estimate of the number of people within the enclosed space, a short description of the built environment, highlighting whether windows or doors were open and whether the structure had open walls, and if there was any artificial ventilation, such as a fan or air-conditioning unit (AC); however, the direction of airflow (AC recircula- tion, outside air, or fan direction) was not recorded. Some patient waiting areas had half wall structures and were referred to as having open walls; the structures feature walls that extend only partway up, often to waist or chest height, and are covered by a roof above. A CO2 monitor manufactured by Aranet4 Technology was used to record CO2 (in ppm) at each data collection point. Data collectors were briefed on standard CO2 monitoring proce- dure, which involved waiting for 20 minutes for the device to calibrate to the room environ- ment before obtaining a reading. Monitors were placed 50 cm away from people to avoid contamination by direct exhaled breath, at head height, away from windows, doors, and air supply openings, and at approximately the center of the room. Readings were taken when the room inhabitants included data collectors, health staff, and clients; therefore, the total number of inhabitants in each room may not be representative of how many would be present during
   PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287) August 14, 2024 4 / 16

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Ventilation assessment in healthcare settings

**Fig 1. Catchment areas for data collection in three municipalities in Ghana. Map created in QGIS using the “Ghana—Subnational Administrative**

Boundaries” base layer supplied by OCHA West and Central Africa and Ghana Statistical Services \[66\] and under the CC BY 3.0 IGO license. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.g001)

standard practice, contributing to potentially higher concentrations of people than normal. CO2 levels were recorded per indoor space, but also calculated per person and per person in excess of atmospheric levels (the per person share of the amount above the atmospheric 417 ppm in 2022).

## Statistical analysis

Variables were summarized as count (%) and mean (SD), separately between the open and closed windows. The summary measures of the variables were compared between the two groups using two-sample t-test or Wilcoxon rank sum test for continuous variables and Chi- square test or Fisher exact test for categorical variables. CO2 concentration values below 800 ppm or 1000 ppm were used as a cut-off to identify facilities with low CO2 level \[46–50\]. Multivariate binomial logistic regression with CO2 levels (Low vs High) as primary outcome and Window/Door/Wall (WDW) status (Open vs Close) as main exposure, was used to assess the independent association between the WDW and CO2 levels while adjusting for potential covariates. Variable redundancy was done using divisive principal component variable cluster- ing to reduce multicollinearity between variables (SAS Certified Statistical Business Analyst Using SAS 9: Regression and Modeling, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). The final model

PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287) August 14, 2024 5 / 16

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Ventilation assessment in healthcare settings

results are expressed as odds ratio, OR (95% Confidence Interval (CI). WDW was considered significantly associated with low CO2 levels if the 95% CI did not contain 1. All analyses were done using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC) and conclusions made at 5% significance level.

## Data storage and confidentiality

Data were entered into an Excel spreadsheet and made accessible to all study personnel. Loca- tion information was de-identified to the municipal level, including only field notes on the built environment and type of setting. Permission to collect CO2 readings in health facilities was granted by the administration at the Tamale Teaching Hospital and the Municipal Health Service Directorates in the Gushegu and Nkwanta South municipalities. The research was determined at New York University Langone not to involve human subjects and was therefore exempt from the human subjects’ regulations as there was no identification of, data collected from, communication with, interpersonal contact with, or interactions with any individual patients.

## Inclusivity in global health research

Additional information regarding the ethical, cultural, and scientific considerations specific to inclusivity in global research is included in the S1 Checklist.

**Results**

## Overall facility characteristics

The basic-level structure for CHPS facilities in Ghana is a two-room structure with an attached pavilion, which, in most cases, serves as a waiting area for patients and an area where child wel- fare clinic services are conducted. All buildings in the CHPS facilities can be naturally venti- lated using windows with adjustable louvres and doors that serve as cross-ventilation openings. The facility windows were covered with nets to prevent the entry of mosquitoes, flies, and other potential disease vectors. Curtains on windows and doors provide privacy. In facilities with consistent power supply, ceiling fans are switched on in most rooms when the weather is hot. No air conditioners were installed at CHPS facilities or health centers that were included in the study. Owing to the compact design of CHPS facilities, furniture, such as cup- boards, fridges, notice boards, and shelves, are sometimes located close to windows, creating congestion that tends to impede the free ventilation flow into rooms. No devices that increase CO2 readings, such as those for cooking, heating, or sterilization of medical equipment were observed. Facilities with improved design, with multiple rooms and better spacing, located in CHPS zones that were not surveyed. Healthcare data were disaggregated by healthcare facilities into readings from municipal and teaching hospitals and CHPS facilities, as shown in Table 1. Across multiple rooms within their physical structures, CHPS facility and hospital readings averaged 679.8 ppm (n = 18) and

973.0 ppm (n = 18), respectively. CHPS facilities were more likely to have open windows or doors in patient rooms and open-air waiting room spaces than hospitals, where field notes recorded the frequent use of wall-mounted air conditioning (AC) or fans. Of the ten facility spaces observed to have no natural ventilation, seven had AC. AC can be set to recirculation or fresh air intake, but device settings could not be observed. With very few exceptions, the lowest quartile of CO2 readings was recorded in either open-air structures or rooms with open win- dows. All open-window and/or open-door facilities had CO2 values lower than 1000 ppm except one value of 1040 ppm in a hospital laboratory. All the CHPS facilities had CO2 levels at
PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287) August 14, 2024 6 / 16

* * *

Table 1. Descriptive statistics on the count of location type, average ppm in each location typology, and average number of people in each location typology.

| Location of reading | Count of Location | Average ppm | Average # of people in each location |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CHPS facility | 18 | 679.8 | 7.1 |
| (range:530-855) |  |  |  |
| Consulting room | 7 | 662.6 | 4.4 |
| Delivery room | 2 | 611.0 | 8.5 |
| Reception room | 1 | 572.0 | 8.0 |
| Stockroom | 1 | 621.0 | 4.0 |
| Waiting area | 7 | 740.6 | 9.7 |
| Hospital | 18 | 973.0(453-2793) | 12.8 |
| Canteen | 1 | 542.0 | 5.0 |
| Waiting area | 2 | 521.0 | 40.5 |
| Consulting room | 2 | 1177.5 | 7.0 |
| ICU | 3 | 715.7 | 13.3 |
| Recovery room | 2 | 826.5 | 13.5 |
| Laboratory | 1 | 1040.0 | 13.0 |
| Hospital administrator's office | 1 | 1445.0 | 4.0 |
| Conference room | 2 | 1713.5 | 12.0 |
| In-patient ward | 1 | 559.0 | 4.0 |
| Operating theatre | 2 | 1164.0 | 5.5 |
| Reception room | 1 | 976.0 | 7.0 |
| Non-healthcare setting | 4 | 982.0(602-1530) | 37.3 |
| Emergency dispatch center | 1 | 1053.0 | 3.0 |
| Church | 1 | 602.0 | 76.0 |
| Conference center | 1 | 1530.0 | 42.0 |
| Gym | 1 | 743.0 | 28.0 |
| Grand Total | 40 | 842.0 | 12.7 |

#

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t001)

or below 855ppm, with 16 of 18 surveyed having values 800 ppm or less. Hospital inpatient
wards, including intensive care units (ICUs), had values less than 1000 ppm. In contrast, the
highest CO2 reading quartile was recorded in rooms with no open windows or doors, with
fans and ACs. Operating theatres, where windows may be closed for sterility, had values above
1000ppm. Conference or administrative offices that relied on AC also had higher CO2 values.
A hospital conference room had the highest reading overall at 2793 ppm with 15 occupants,
closed windows and doors, air conditioning and fan turned on. In contrast, a hospital obstetric
recovery room had the lowest reading at 453 ppm, despite 10 occupants; it had eight windows
open and three fans running.
Data collectors recorded readings in patient and non-patient areas of the healthcare facili-

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

{\\mathfrak{t}},{\\mathrm{C O}{}\_\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

open and three fans running.
Data collectors recorded readings in patient and non-patient areas of the healthcare facilities. The areas where patients were seen, such as consulting rooms or waiting areas, had lower
average CO2 levels (748.3 ppm) than areas where only staff congregated, such as the clinic laboratory, conference room, and hospital canteen, which had higher average CO2 levels
(1150.1 ppm). Furthermore, the concentration (ppm) per person can serve as an indicator of
ventilation effectiveness. CHPS facilities averaged fewer people per room (7.1) compared to
that in hospitals (12.8) and had a lower average ppm/person (114.9) than that of hospitals
(125.5).
Data collectors also recorded some (n = 4) readings in non-healthcare facilities, specifically

(mathfrak n4)

* * *

Table 2. Comparison of indoor spaces by clinical CO2 ppm threshold (800ppm)\*.

| Variables |  | Overall | CO2ppm≥800 | CO2ppm<800 | P value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Window/Door/Wall | N(%) | 40 | 13(33) | 27(67) |  |
| \# of people | 12.7(14.7) | 13.3(10.9) | 12.4(16.4) | 0.19 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Patients present | Closed | 10(25%) | 9(69%) | 1(4%) | <0.0001 |
| Open | 30(75) | 4(31) | 26(96) |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | 0.16 |  |
| Facility level | Healthcare workers only | 7(18%) | 4(31%) | 3(11%) |  |
| Patients present | 29(73) | 7(54) | 22(81) |  |  |
| Not a healthcare facility | 4(10) | 2(15) | 2(7) |  |  |
| Facility level |  |  |  |  | 0.0328 |
| Community health center | 18(45%) | 2(15%) | 16(59%) |  |  |
| Hospital | 18(45) | 9(69) | 9(33) |  |  |
| Non-healthcare | 4(10) | 2(15) | 2(7) |  |  |

\\mathbf{c0}\_{2}

\\tt{C O\_{2}p p m\ \ 800}

\\mathrm{O\_{2},p p m\ 800

\*Data values in mean (SD) or count (%). Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t002)

In contrast, the conference center, with no open windows but with mechanical ventilation
(air-conditioning), had much higher CO2 levels, with fewer people (42) at 1530 ppm.

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

Facility characteristics by CO2 levels

Tables 2 and 3 show the distribution of the facilities variables by level of CO2 levels. A total of
40 facility readings were included in this survey. Of these, 90% were in healthcare facilities and
75% relied on natural ventilation. Overall, the average number of persons present in each
space measured was 13 people. The facilities relying on natural ventilation (defined by open
windows, doors, or walls) achieved considerably better rates of acceptable CO2 levels, below
the standard thresholds of 800 ppm (2a) or 1000 ppm (2b). Community health facilities, which

\\mathbf{c{}{bf O{}}{\_2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

Table 3. Comparison of indoor spaces by clinical CO2 ppm threshold (1000ppm)\*.
Variables Overall

| Variables |  | Overall | CO2ppm≥1000 | CO2ppm<1000 | P value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Window/Door/Wall | N(%) | 40 | 9(23) | 31(77) |  |
| \# of people | 12.7(14.7) | 12.8(12.1) | 12.6(15.5) | 0.68 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Patients present | Closed | 10(25%) | 8(89%) | 2(6%) | <0.0001 |
| Open | 30(75) | 1(11) | 29(94) |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | 0.08 |  |
| Facility level | Healthcare workers only | 7(18%) | 3(33%) | 4(13%) |  |
| Patients present | 29(73) | 4(44) | 25(81) |  |  |
| Not a healthcare facility | 4(10) | 2(22) | 2(6) |  |  |
| Facility level |  |  |  |  | 0.005 |
| Community health center | 18(45%) | 0(0%) | 18(58%) |  |  |
| Hospital | 18(45) | 7(78) | 11(36) |  |  |
| Non-healthcare | 4(10) | 2(22) | 2(7) |  |  |

\\mathbf{c0\_{2}}

\ mathrm\|\|mathttmathtt C0\_{2},\\mathtt{p p m}\\geq1000

\*Data values in mean (SD) or count (%). Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t003)

* * *

Table 4. Comparison of CO2 per person and the CO2 per person beyond the atmospheric level compared between those with and without natural outdoor air ventilation (windows, doors, and/or walls open).

\\mathbf{c{}}\\mathbf{o}\_{2}

\\mathbf{c0}\_{2}

| Variables |  | Overall | No Natural Ventilation | Natural Ventilation | P value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | N(%) | 40 | 10(25) | 30(75) |  |
|  | \# of people | 12.7(14.7) | 11.8(11.6) | 13.0(15.7) | 0.95 |
|  | CO2 PPM per person | 118.7(84.9) | 187.0(120.6) | 96.0(55.0) | 0.0324 |
|  | Excess CO2 PPM per person | 56.6(60.3) | 125.3(85.4) | 33.7(21.2) | 0.0017 |
|  | CO2 PPM overall level | 842.0(439.9) | 1378(597.4) | 663.3(132.2) | 0.0043 |
| Patient present |  |  |  |  | 0.0189 |
|  | Healthcare workers only | 7(18) | 4(40) | 3(10) |  |
|  | Patients present | 29(73) | 4(40) | 25(83) |  |
|  | Not healthcare facility | 4(10) | 2(20) | 2(7) |  |
| Facility level |  |  |  |  | 0.0019 |
|  | Community health center | 18(45) | 0(0) | 18(60) |  |
|  | Hospital | 18(45) | 8(80) | 10(33) |  |
|  | Non-healthcare | 4(10) | 2(20) | 2(7) |  |

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\*Data values in mean (SD) or count (%).

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t004)

all relied on natural ventilation, had the highest rate of acceptable CO2 levels. Most community
health facilities (88.9%) met the 800ppm threshold, while all community health facilities met
the 1000ppm threshold. In hospitals, only half of readings met the 800ppm threshold and 61%
met the 1000ppm threshold. Most locations where patients were present met the 800ppm
(76%) and 1000pm (86%) thresholds. Health facility locations where patients were not present
(such as administrative offices and conference rooms) often did not meet the threshold standards; only 43% met 800pm and 57% met 1000pm, though only 7 such sites were studied.

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

Association between natural outdoor air ventilation and low CO2 levels
Table 4 shows the distribution of the variables between facilities with natural and non-natural

Table 4 shows the distribution of the variables between facilities with natural and non-natural
ventilation. Compared to non-natural ventilation facilities, those with natural ventilation have

96 vs 187, p = 0.0043; Excess CO2 ppm per person: 34 vs 125, p = 0.0017; CO2
vs 10%, p = <0.0001; CO2 < 1000 ppm: 97% vs 20%, p = <0.0001). In addition, facilities with
natural ventilation when compared with facilities without natural ventilation were more commonly community health centers (60% vs 0%), had patients present (83% vs 40%), and on
average had slightly higher number of people (13 vs 12). After adjusting for facility level
patients present, and number of people, the adjusted odds ratio of low CO2
ities compared with non-natural were: odds ratios, OR (95% CI): 21.7 (1.89, 247) for CO2
800 ppm, and 16.8 (1.55, 183) for CO2 < 1000 ppm (Table 5). Natural ventilation is consistently significantly associated with higher likelihood of low CO2

ppm per person: 34 vs 125, p = 0.0017; CO2 < 800 ppm: 87%
< 1000 ppm: 97% vs 20%, p = <0.0001). In addition, facilities with
natural ventilation when compared with facilities without natural ventilation were more commonly community health centers (60% vs 0%), had patients present (83% vs 40%), and on
average had slightly higher number of people (13 vs 12). After adjusting for facility level
patients present, and number of people, the adjusted odds ratio of low CO2 in the natural facilities compared with non-natural were: odds ratios, OR (95% CI): 21.7 (1.89, 247) for CO2 <
< 1000 ppm (Table 5). Natural ventilation is consistently significantly associated with higher likelihood of low CO2 concentrations.

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{O O\_\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

,p=<0.0001;C0\_{2}<1000

{\\sf p}=<0.0001)

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O}\_{2}<

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}<1000}

\\mathrm{O}\_{2}

* * *

Table 5. Logistic regression for the association between natural ventilation and low CO2 ppm.

| Variables |  | Adjusted OR(95%CI) |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | CO2<800ppm | CO2<1000ppm |
| Natural ventilation |  |  |  |
|  | Yes | 26.6(2.24,315) | 18.12(1.77,186) |
|  | No(reference) |  |  |
| Facility level |  |  |  |
|  | Community health center | 0.69(0.01,36.6) | 8.6(0.07,100) |
|  | Hospital | 0.47(0.02,11.7) | 1.53(0.05,43.4) |
|  | Non-healthcare(reference) |  |  |
| Number of people |  | 0.98(0.92,1.05) | 0.99(0.93,1.08) |

\\mathrm{\ C O\_{2}<800;p p m}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}<1000;p p m}

Y e s

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287.t005)

higher risk for poor ventilation and disease transmission can identify needed modifications.
These can prompt simple steps such as moving bookshelves blocking a window or ensuring
cross ventilation with two open doors. It can mean focusing investments on areas without natural ventilation alternatives, such as by prioritizing mechanical ventilation in operating theatres to avoid open windows contaminating surgical fields and where masking already reduces
respiratory risk.
Here the low CO2 levels in CHPS facilities (average of 679.8 ppm) and higher CO2 levels in

Here the low CO2 levels in CHPS facilities (average of 679.8 ppm) and higher CO2 levels in
hospitals (average of 973 ppm) demonstrates that there are lessons to be learned in the built
environments of these smaller community facilities. There was a statistically significant difference in means of CO2 levels between built environments with natural ventilation and without,
wherein those with natural ventilation saw lower levels of CO2 on average. This effect was not
simply because these facilities had fewer individuals present. The overall levels in the CHPS
facilities were all below indoor ventilation standards for high quality air in Japan (1000 ppm)
and well below the US workplace upper limit (5000 ppm). It is promising to see that resourceconstrained facilities, such as rural Ghana, can consistently achieve these results and create an
important layer of protection \[44, 67\].
Investment in air-conditioning alone for indoor climate control may otherwise result in

\\mathrm{C O}\_{2}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

Investment in air-conditioning alone for indoor climate control may otherwise result in
using recycled air and less ventilation, leading to a deceptively cool office space, while overlooking the benefits in reducing respiratory disease transmission. The data here, showing
higher levels of CO2 in air-conditioned spaces, is a reminder that AC, especially when on recirculation and not with fresh air intake, is not a substitute for natural ventilation, where consciously designed open-air waiting spaces and air flow can achieve needed ventilation. Natural
ventilation will not protect against all risks, but safeguards such as louvered windows and
screens (and lowered CO2 itself reduces mosquito attraction) can reduce hazards \[35, 61, 68\].
The CO2 metric allows healthcare workers to pinpoint high-risk areas for undetected respiratory pathogen transmission which might have been unrecognized. This risk is not just in

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

The CO2 metric allows healthcare workers to pinpoint high-risk areas for undetected respiratory pathogen transmission which might have been unrecognized. This risk is not just in
patient care areas, but often among staff- only areas in poorly ventilated break rooms, laboratories, conference rooms, canteens, and offices, where there may be less attention paid to the
danger of nosocomial spread among the staff. Laboratory ventilation is an essential layer of
protection, well known in tuberculosis (TB) laboratories, but the commitment needs to be
maintained as microbes are inherently undiagnosed and new pathogens may arrive unexpectedly as climate change and mobility may expand the range of pathogens, from Burkholderia
pseudomallei to fungal infections. Moreover, past outbreaks in hospitals have been traced back
to healthcare worker chains of transmission both in SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks but also in other
types of disease transmission, such as with Ebola \[69, 70\]. These outbreaks often occur in

metric allows healthcare workers to pinpoint high-risk areas for undetected respiratory pathogen transmission which might have been unrecognized. This risk is not just in
patient care areas, but often among staff- only areas in poorly ventilated break rooms, laboratories, conference rooms, canteens, and offices, where there may be less attention paid to the
danger of nosocomial spread among the staff. Laboratory ventilation is an essential layer of
protection, well known in tuberculosis (TB) laboratories, but the commitment needs to be
maintained as microbes are inherently undiagnosed and new pathogens may arrive unexpectedly as climate change and mobility may expand the range of pathogens, from Burkholderia
pseudomallei to fungal infections. Moreover, past outbreaks in hospitals have been traced back
to healthcare worker chains of transmission both in SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks but also in other
types of disease transmission, such as with Ebola \[69, 70\]. These outbreaks often occur in

types of disease transmission, such as with Ebola \[69, 70\]. These outbreaks often occur in
breakrooms where no patients are seen. The data here highlight the importance of designing

* * *

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}} well-ventilated spaces across the entire facility, including in healthcare worker only areas; the
least well-ventilated spaces in the sample included conference room, administrative offices,
and clinician consultation rooms, highlighting the need for attention to healthcare workeronly areas.
To better address ventilation, more data can pinpoint areas at risk and highlight already

To better address ventilation, more data can pinpoint areas at risk and highlight already
well-designed facilities. This study presents an initial picture of qualitative assessments of built
environments in health facilities and quantitative measures of CO2 using standardized measurements in these facilities. However, further research is warranted to elucidate best practices
for clinicians and public health practitioners to better maximize the role of ventilation in the
built environment. Further studies can more closely study respiratory—as well as aerosolized
enteric—disease spread to better recognize the impact of natural and artificial ventilation in
health facilities. These initial results speak to the quality of the design of existing facilities and
are promising in terms of documenting CO2 ppm levels and the circulatory capacity of healthcare spaces.
The use of ventilation in health facilities progressed from miasma to germ theory during

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

The use of ventilation in health facilities progressed from miasma to germ theory during
the 19th century, often motivated by the persistent threat of TB and later by influenza in the
th
20 century \[18, 71\]. In the 21st century, epidemics of respiratory pathogens, such as SARS--
CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, underscored the need for equitable ventilation solutions as technology advanced toward higher-cost HVAC. Here CO2 monitoring is a reminder of the
importance of natural ventilation and designed spaces in reducing the risk of nosocomial
transmission, which is important to understand as climate change may impact the application
of these measures as it affects temperatures, weather patterns, and disease risks.

20^{\\mathrm{t h}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

Limitations

The metric used, CO2 ppm, does not fully capture the risk of respiratory pathogen transmission. More research is needed to understand how to use CO2 readings effectively in clinical
environments to improve IPC and respond to different pathogen risks.
Data collection was limited by the availability of facilities within the sampling frame;

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}f}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

Data collection was limited by the availability of facilities within the sampling frame;
data points included CO2 readings, occupancy figures, and notes on built environments.
The statistical analyses only highlight that CO2 levels were found to be low with natural ventilation. This is reassuring but does not mean that artificial ventilation could not achieve the
same results. Cost-effectiveness necessitated the use of purposive sampling in the study,
thereby limiting the representativeness of the findings, but future studies should consider
probability sampling on a larger scale to conduct more extensive causal analyses on the
associations between CO2 levels and built environments. Improving ventilation requires an
understanding of how room height and cross ventilation affects draft patterns, how AC settings can affect ventilation, how outdoor climate influences ambient indoor CO2 levels, how
room function and occupant activities alter expelled CO2, and how the building design itself
encourages or discourages airflow through intentionally placed windows, hallways, and
doors. Future analyses can consider seasonality with temperature and wind direction
changes, but here readings were limited to June to September, owing to data collector availability. Data from colder or Harmattan months may be less reassuring in community health
facilities if windows are closed. Data can also follow variation of CO2 with different occupancy levels throughout the day or with modifications in the indoor environment. Further
data on the structure size, layout, and other air quality measures will add to the picture.
Future research can build on this exploration into an under-researched body of literature by
examining the possibility of making several CO2 monitors available for year-long data collection and environmental modification.

\ \_\_{

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O}\_{\ 2

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

* * *

Conclusion

Resource-constrained countries have struggled to implement global IPC standards and maintain PPE supply chains in outbreaks and emergencies \[6, 14, 72–75\]. A broad understanding of
healthy environments should prioritize effective and robust additive layers that are “alwayson”, especially as climate change and mobility may create unexpected infectious risks. These
approaches do not necessarily require “high tech” or costly solutions, but instead can utilize
what is tried and true. The known importance of natural ventilation can be highlighted with
hand-held CO2 readers used by clinicians and public health professionals. These metrics can
increase the appreciation of existing solutions and guide the use of simple adjustments to
improve ventilation and reduce nosocomial respiratory disease transmission. Public health
and clinical professionals should broaden their appreciation of the infrastructure strategies
implemented globally. The use of CO2 ppm metrics can shine light on ventilation as an IPC
strategy and inspire practical adjustments to improve IPC in health facilities.
The data underlying this study are available in Open Science Framework (OSF) \[76\].

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

The data underlying this study are available in Open Science Framework (OSF) \[76\].

Supporting information

S1 Checklist. Inclusivity in global research.
(DOCX)

(DOCX)

Acknowledgments

We appreciate help and guidance from Dr Rachel Moresky as well as from all our colleagues at
the Ghana Health Service, University for Development Studies School of Medicine, Tamale
Teaching Hospital, NYU Langone, including the Section for Global Health and NYU
AMPATH (Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare) Ghana, Columbia University
Mailman School of Public Health, the International Rescue Committee, and AIM-AHEAD
(Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning Consortium to Advance Health Equity and
Researcher Diversity).

Author Contributions

Conceptualization: Megan P. Coffee.

Data curation: Cecilia Crews, Paul Angwaawie, Alhassan Abdul-Mumin, Megan P. Coffee.

Formal analysis: John Dibato, Megan P. Coffee.

Project administration: Cecilia Crews, Paul Angwaawie, Alhassan Abdul-Mumin, Iddrisu
Baba Yabasin.

Supervision: Cecilia Crews, Alhassan Abdul-Mumin, Megan P. Coffee.

Validation: Cecilia Crews, Paul Angwaawie, Alhassan Abdul-Mumin, Iddrisu Baba Yabasin,
Evans Attivor.

* * *

**P L O S AG LL OP BU HB EL AI C L T H** Ventilation assessment in healthcare settings

## Writing – original draft: Cecilia Crews, Megan P. Coffee.

## Writing – review & editing: Cecilia Crews, Paul Angwaawie, Alhassan Abdul-Mumin, Iddrisu

Baba Yabasin, Evans Attivor, John Dibato, Megan P. Coffee.

**References**

**1.** Reason J. The contribution of latent human failures to the breakdown of complex systems. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci \[Internet\]. 1990 Apr 12 \[cited 2023 Jun 7\]; Available from: https:// royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.1990.0090
**2.** CDC. Hierarchy of Controls \[Internet\]. 2023 \[cited 2023 Jun 1\]. Available from: [https://www.cdc.gov/](https://www.cdc.gov/) niosh/topics/hierarchy/default.html
**3.** Dehghani F, Omidi F, Yousefinejad S, Taheri E. The hierarchy of preventive measures to protect work- ers against the COVID-19 pandemic: A review. Work. 2020 Jan 1; 67(4):771–7. [https://doi.org/10.3233/](https://doi.org/10.3233/) WOR-203330 PMID: 33337399
**4.** Thorne CD, Khozin S, McDiarmid MA. Using the Hierarchy of Control Technologies to Improve Health- care Facility Infection Control: Lessons From Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. J Occup Environ Med. 2004; 46(7):613–22. [https://doi.org/10.1097/01.jom.0000134191.92225.f2](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.jom.0000134191.92225.f2) PMID: 15247800
**5.** Escombe AR, Ticona E, Cha´ vez-Pe´ rez V, Espinoza M, Moore DAJ. Improving natural ventilation in hos- pital waiting and consulting rooms to reduce nosocomial tuberculosis transmission risk in a low resource setting. BMC Infect Dis. 2019 Jan 25; 19(1):88. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-019-3717-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-019-3717-9) PMID: 30683052
**6.** Bedford J, Enria D, Giesecke J, Heymann DL, Ihekweazu C, Kobinger G, et al. COVID-19: towards con- trolling of a pandemic. Lancet Lond Engl. 2020; 395(10229):1015–8. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-) 6736(20)30673-5 PMID: 32197103
**7.** Maltezou HC, Wicker S. Measles in health-care settings. Am J Infect Control. 2013 Jul; 41(7):661–3. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2012.09.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2012.09.017) PMID: 23352075
**8.** Children Nicoll A., avian influenza H5N1 and preparing for the next pandemic. Arch Dis Child. 2008 May; 93(5):433–8.
**9.** Sprigg WA, Nickovic S, Galgiani JN, Pejanovic G, Petkovic S, Vujadinovic M, et al. Regional dust storm modeling for health services: The case of valley fever. Aeolian Res. 2014 Sep 1; 14:53–73.
**10.** Spicknall IH, Koopman JS, Nicas M, Pujol JM, Li S, Eisenberg JNS. Informing Optimal Environmental Influenza Interventions: How the Host, Agent, and Environment Alter Dominant Routes of Transmis- sion. PLOS Comput Biol. 2010 Oct 28; 6(10):e1000969. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000969](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000969) PMID: 21060854
**11.** Mendell MJ, Eliseeva EA, Davies MM, Spears M, Lobscheid A, Fisk WJ, et al. Association of classroom ventilation with reduced illness absence: a prospective study in California elementary schools. Indoor Air. 2013 Dec; 23(6):515–28. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12042](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12042) PMID: 23506393
**12.** Johnson O, Youkee D, Brown CS, Lado M, Wurie A, Bash-Taqi D, et al. Ebola Holding Units at govern- ment hospitals in Sierra Leone: evidence for a flexible and effective model for safe isolation, early treat- ment initiation, hospital safety and health system functioning. BMJ Glob Health. 2016 Jun 1; 1(1): e000030. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2016-000030](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2016-000030) PMID: 28588922
**13.** Oxfam. Guidelines on Medical Isolation Facilities in Outbreak Responses. [https://www.oxfamwash.org/](https://www.oxfamwash.org/) response-types/ebola/Oxfam\_Guidelines\_on\_Medical\_Isolation\_Facilities.pdf
**14.** Rajakaruna SJ, Liu WB, Ding YB, Cao GW. Strategy and technology to prevent hospital-acquired infec- tions: Lessons from SARS, Ebola, and MERS in Asia and West Africa. Mil Med Res. 2017 Oct 27; 4
(1):32. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s40779-017-0142-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40779-017-0142-5) PMID: 29502517
**15.** Atkinson J, Chartier Y, Pessoa-Silva CL, Jensen P, Li Y, Seto WH, editors. Natural Ventilation for Infec- tion Control in Health-Care Settings \[Internet\]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009 \[cited 2023 May 31\]. (WHO Guidelines Approved by the Guidelines Review Committee). Available from: http:// [www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK143284/](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK143284/) **16.** Fordham M. Natural ventilation. Renew Energy. 2000 Jan 1; 19(1):17–37.
**17.** Oren I, Haddad N, Finkelstein R, Rowe JM. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before and after chemoprophylaxis and institution of HEPA filters. Am J Hematol. 2001 Apr; 66(4):257–62. [https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.1054](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.1054) PMID: 11279636
**18.** Hobday RA, Dancer SJ. Roles of sunlight and natural ventilation for controlling infection: historical and current perspectives. J Hosp Infect. 2013 Aug 1; 84(4):271–82. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2013.04](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2013.04). 011 PMID: 23790506
PLOS Global Public Health \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0003287) August 14, 2024 13 / 16

* * *

19. Escombe AR, Oeser CC, Gilman RH, Navincopa M, Ticona E, Pan W, et al. Natural Ventilation for the
    Prevention of Airborne Contagion. PLOS Med. 2007 Feb 27; 4(2):e68. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal).
    pmed.0040068 PMID: 17326709

20. Zia H, Singh R, Seth M, Ahmed A, Azim A. Engineering Solutions for Preventing Airborne Transmission
    in Hospitals with Resource Limitation and Demand Surge. Indian J Crit Care Med Peer-Rev Off Publ
    Indian Soc Crit Care Med. 2021 Apr; 25(4):453–60. [https://doi.org/10.5005/jp-journals-10071-23792](https://doi.org/10.5005/jp-journals-10071-23792)
    PMID: 34045813

21. Chandrashekaran D. Air flow through louvered openings: Effect of louver slats on air movement inside a
    space \[Internet\] \[M.B.S.\]. \[United States—California\]: University of Southern California; \[cited 2023\
    Jun 7\]. Available from: [https://www.proquest.com/docview/840789736/abstract/](https://www.proquest.com/docview/840789736/abstract/)
    32BE91FC566B48F8PQ/1

22. Allard F, Ghiaus C. Natural Ventilation in the Urban Environment: Assessment and Design. Routledge;

23. 261 p.

24. Bhagat RK, Linden PF. Displacement ventilation: a viable ventilation strategy for makeshift hospitals
    and public buildings to contain COVID-19 and other airborne diseases. R Soc Open Sci. 2020 Sep; 7
    (9):200680. [https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.200680](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.200680) PMID: 33047029

25. Villarroel-Lamb D, Lamb AR. Natural ventilation in Caribbean homes: a numerical investigation. Proc
    Inst Civ Eng—Eng Comput Mech. 2022 Sep; 175(3):120–37.

26. Carrilho da Grac¸a G, Linden P. Ten questions about natural ventilation of non-domestic buildings. Build
    Environ. 2016 Oct 1; 107:263–73.

27. Indraganti M. Adaptive use of natural ventilation for thermal comfort in Indian apartments. Build Environ.
    2010 Jun 1; 45(6):1490–507.

28. Lomas KJ, Ji Y. Resilience of naturally ventilated buildings to climate change: Advanced natural ventilation and hospital wards. Energy Build. 2009 Jun 1; 41(6):629–53.

29. Yun GY, Steemers K. Time-dependent occupant behaviour models of window control in summer. Build
    Environ. 2008 Sep 1; 43(9):1471–82.

30. Campbell-Lendrum D, Huang C, Liu Q, McGregor G, Basu R, Kerr RB, et al. Health, Wellbeing and the
    Changing Structure of Communities. Clim Change 2022 Impacts Adapt Vulnerability.

31. Rose HD, Hirsch SR. Filtering hospital air decreases Aspergillus spore counts. Am Rev Respir Dis.
    1979 Mar; 119(3):511–3. [https://doi.org/10.1164/arrd.1979.119.3.511](https://doi.org/10.1164/arrd.1979.119.3.511) PMID: 109022

32. Jatta E, Carrasco-Tenezaca M, Jawara M, Bradley J, Ceesay S, D’Alessandro U, et al. Impact of
    increased ventilation on indoor temperature and malaria mosquito density: an experimental study in
    The Gambia. J R Soc Interface. 2021 May; 18(178):20201030. [https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.1030](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.1030)
    PMID: 33975463

33. Staszkiewicz J, Lewis CM, Colville J, Zervos M, Band J. Outbreak of Brucella melitensis among microbiology laboratory workers in a community hospital. J Clin Microbiol. 1991 Feb; 29(2):287–90. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1128/jcm.29.2.287-290.1991 PMID: 2007637

34. Luiken REC, Heederik DJJ, Scherpenisse P, Van Gompel L, van Heijnsbergen E, Greve GD, et al.
    Determinants for antimicrobial resistance genes in farm dust on 333 poultry and pig farms in nine European countries. Environ Res. 2022 May 15; 208:112715. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2022.112715](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2022.112715)
    PMID: 35033551

35. Chezganova E, Efimova O, Sakharova V, Efimova A, Sozinov S, Kutikhin A, et al. Ventilation-Associated Particulate Matter Is a Potential Reservoir of Multidrug-Resistant Organisms in Health Facilities.
    Life Basel Switz. 2021 Jun 30; 11(7):639. [https://doi.org/10.3390/life11070639](https://doi.org/10.3390/life11070639) PMID: 34209235

36. Mmbando AS, Bradley J, Kazimbaya D, Kasubiri R, Knudsen J, Siria D, et al. The effect of light and ventilation on house entry by Anopheles arabiensis sampled using light traps in Tanzania: an experimental
    hut study. Malar J. 2022 Feb 5; 21(1):36. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-022-04063-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-022-04063-3) PMID:
    35123497

37. Carrasco-Tenezaca M, Jawara M, Lee DSH, Holmes MS, Ceesay S, McCall P, et al. Effect of passive
    and active ventilation on malaria mosquito house entry and human comfort: an experimental study in
    rural Gambia. J R Soc Interface. 2023 Apr 5; 20(201):20220794. [https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2022.0794](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2022.0794)
    PMID: 37015266

38. Holliman RE, Liddy H, Johnson JD, Adjei O. Epidemiology of invasive pneumococcal disease in
    Kumasi, Ghana. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2007 Apr; 101(4):405–13. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j](https://doi.org/10.1016/j).
    trstmh.2006.08.014 PMID: 17126867

39. Goudie AS. Desert dust and human health disorders. Environ Int. 2014 Feb; 63:101–13. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
    10.1016/j.envint.2013.10.011 PMID: 24275707

40. Goudie AS. Desert dust and human health disorders. Environ Int. 2014 Feb; 63:101–13. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
    10.1016/j.envint.2013.10.011 PMID: 24275707


* * *

39. Agier L, Deroubaix A, Martiny N, Yaka P, Djibo A, Broutin H. Seasonality of meningitis in Africa and climate forcing: aerosols stand out. J R Soc Interface. 2013 Feb 6; 10(79):20120814. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1098/rsif.2012.0814 PMID: 23221989
40. Fussell JC, Kelly FJ. Mechanisms underlying the health effects of desert sand dust. Environ Int. 2021
    Dec 1; 157:106790. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106790](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106790) PMID: 34333291
41. De Longueville F, Hountondji YC, Henry S, Ozer P. What do we know about effects of desert dust on air
    quality and human health in West Africa compared to other regions? Sci Total Environ. 2010 Dec 1; 409
    (1):1–8. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2010.09.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2010.09.025) PMID: 20934742
42. Trianti SM, Samoli E, Rodopoulou S, Katsouyanni K, Papiris SA, Karakatsani A. Desert dust outbreaks
    and respiratory morbidity in Athens, Greece. Environ Health. 2017 Jul 1; 16(1):72. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1186/s12940-017-0281-x PMID: 28666479
43. Chien LC, Lien YJ, Yang CH, Yu HL. Acute Increase of Children’s Conjunctivitis Clinic Visits by Asian
    Dust Storms Exposure—A Spatiotemporal Study in Taipei, Taiwan. PLOS ONE. 2014 Oct 27; 9(10):
    e109175. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0109175](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0109175) PMID: 25347189
44. Ishigaki Y, Enoki K, Yokogawa S. Accuracy verification of low-cost CO2 concentration measuring
    devices for general use as a countermeasure against COVID-19 \[Internet\]. Public and Global Health;
    2021 Jul \[cited 2023 Jun 16\]. Available from: [http://medrxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2021.07.30](http://medrxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2021.07.30).
    21261265
45. Zhang D, Bluyssen PM. Exploring the possibility of using CO2 as a proxy for exhaled particles to predict
    the risk of indoor exposure to pathogens. Indoor Built Environ. 2022 Jun 27;1420326X221110043.
46. ASHRAE. ASHRAE Position Document on Indoor Carbon Dioxide. Georgia: ASHRAE; 2022. Available
    from: [https://www.ashrae.org/file%20library/about/position%20documents/pd\_indoorcarbondioxide](https://www.ashrae.org/file%20library/about/position%20documents/pd_indoorcarbondioxide)\_
    2022.pdf
47. CDC. Ventilation in buildings. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2021. Available
    from: [https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/ventilation.html](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/ventilation.html)
48. BFG. Belgian pandemic emergency decree. Belgian Federal Government—Ministry of Internal Affairs;
50. EMG/SPI-B. Application of CO2 monitoring as an approach to managing ventilation to mitigate SARS-
    COV-2 transmission. 2021. Available from: [https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emg-and-spib-application-of-co2-monitoring-as-an-approach-to-managing-ventilation-to-mitigate-sars-cov-2-](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emg-and-spib-application-of-co2-monitoring-as-an-approach-to-managing-ventilation-to-mitigate-sars-cov-2-)
    transmission-27-may-2021
51. REHVA. REHVA COVID-19 Guidance, version 4.1. Brussels, Belgium: Federation of European Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning Associations; 2021. Available from: [https://www.rehva.eu/](https://www.rehva.eu/)
    activities/covid-19-guidance/rehva-covid-19-guidance
52. Issarow CM, Mulder N, Wood R. Modelling the risk of airborne infectious disease using exhaled air. J
    Theor Biol. 2015 May 7; 372:100–6. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2015.02.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2015.02.010) PMID: 25702940
53. Rivas E, Santiago JL, Martı´n F, Martilli A. Impact of natural ventilation on exposure to SARS-CoV 2 in
    indoor/semi-indoor terraces using CO2 concentrations as a proxy. J Build Eng. 2022 Apr 1; 46:103725.
54. Zemouri C, Awad SF, Volgenant CMC, Crielaard W, Laheij AMGA, de Soet JJ. Modeling of the Transmission of Coronaviruses, Measles Virus, Influenza Virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Legionella
    pneumophila in Dental Clinics. J Dent Res. 2020 Sep 1; 99(10):1192–8.
55. NOAA. Annual 2022 Global Climate Report. National Centers for Environmental Information; 2023.
    Available from: [https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/monitoring/monthly-report/global/202213](https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/monitoring/monthly-report/global/202213)
56. Nyonator Frank, John Awoonor-Williams James Phillips, Jones Tanya, and Miller Robert. “The Ghana
    Community-Based Health Planning and Services Initiative: Fostering Evidence-Based Organizational
    Change and Development in a Resource-Constrained Setting.” Population Council, 2003. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.31899/pgy6.1086
57. Awoonor-Williams JK, Sory EK, Nyonator FK, Phillips JF, Wang C, Schmitt ML. Lessons learned from
    scaling up a community-based health program in the Upper East Region of northern Ghana. Glob
    Health Sci Pr. 2013/03/01 ed. 2013 Mar; 1(1):117–33.
58. Kweku M, Amu H, Awolu A, Adjuik M, Ayanore MA, Manu E, et al. Community-Based Health Planning
    and Services Plus programme in Ghana: A qualitative study with stakeholders in two Systems Learning
    Districts on improving the implementation of primary health care. PLOS ONE. 2020 Jan 8; 15(1):
    e0226808. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226808](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226808) PMID: 31914122
59. Regmi K. Decentralizing health services: A global perspective. Springer; 2013.
60. Roberts BM, Kasei R, Codjoe SN, Amankwaa EF, Gough KV, Abdullah K, et al. Comparing indoor air
    quality in naturally ventilated and air-conditioned hospitals in the tropics. In Loughborough University;
    2022 \[cited 2023 May 31\]. Available from: [https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/articles/conference](https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/articles/conference)\_ the\_tropics/21168115/1
61. Fennelly M, Hellebust S, Wenger J, O’Connor D, Griffith GW, Plant BJ, et al. Portable HEPA filtration
    successfully augments natural-ventilation-mediated airborne particle clearance in a legacy design hospital ward. J Hosp Infect. 2023 Jan 1; 131:54–7. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2022.09.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2022.09.017) PMID:
    36198345
62. Abdulhamid F, Tukur RB. Assessment of the Impact of Natural Ventilation in the Renovated Katsina
    General Hospital, Katsina State, Nigeria. \| Dutse Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences. \[cited 2023\
    May 31\]; Available from: [https://www.ajol.info/index.php/dujopas/article/view/219318](https://www.ajol.info/index.php/dujopas/article/view/219318)
63. Ha W, Zabarsky TF, Eckstein EC, Alhmidi H, Jencson AL, Cadnum JL, et al. Use of carbon dioxide measurements to assess ventilation in an acute care hospital. Am J Infect Control. 2022 Feb; 50(2):229–32.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2021.11.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2021.11.017) PMID: 34848292
64. Rudnick SN, Milton DK. Risk of indoor airborne infection transmission estimated from carbon dioxide
    concentration. Indoor Air. 2003; 13(3):237–45. [https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0668.2003.00189.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0668.2003.00189.x)
    PMID: 12950586
65. Nathavitharana RR, Mishra H, Sullivan A, Hurwitz S, Lederer P, Meintjes J, et al. Predicting Airborne
    Infection Risk: Association Between Personal Ambient Carbon Dioxide Level Monitoring and Incidence
    of Tuberculosis Infection in South African Health Workers. Clin Infect Dis. 2022 Oct 15; 75(8):1297–
66. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciac183](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciac183) PMID: 35348657
67. Time and Date. Weather in August 2022 in Nkwanta South, Ghana \[Internet\]. \[cited 2023 Sep 22\]. Available from: [https://www.timeanddate.com/weather/@7647498/historic?month=8&year=2022](https://www.timeanddate.com/weather/@7647498/historic?month=8&year=2022)
68. OCHA West and Central Africa, and Ghana Statistical Services. “Ghana—Subnational Administrative
    Boundaries.” Ghana: Humanitarian Data Exchange, April 4, 2023. [https://data.humdata.org/dataset/](https://data.humdata.org/dataset/)
    cod-ab-gha.
69. OSHA. OSHA Occupational Chemical Database. 2022 \[cited 2023 Jun 16\]. Carbon Dioxide. Available
    from: [https://www.osha.gov/chemicaldata/183](https://www.osha.gov/chemicaldata/183)
70. Efunshile AM, Ojide CK, Igwe D, Onyia B, Jokelainen P, Robertson LJ. Mosquito control at a tertiary
    teaching hospital in Nigeria. Infect Prev Pract. 2021 Dec 1; 3(4):100172. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infpip](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infpip).
    2021.100172 PMID: 34604733
71. Gordon CL, Trubiano JA, Holmes NE, Chua KYL, Feldman J, Young G, et al. Staff to staff transmission
    as a driver of healthcare worker infections with COVID-19. Infect Dis Health. 2021 Nov; 26(4):276–83.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idh.2021.06.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idh.2021.06.003) PMID: 34344634
72. Sanford J, Holdsworth J. PPE training and the effectiveness of universal masking in preventing exposures: The importance of the relationship between anesthesia and infection prevention. Am J Infect
    Control. 2021 Oct; 49(10):1322–3. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2021.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2021.05.003) PMID: 34022296
73. English TR, Koenigshofer D. A History of the Changing Concepts on Health-Care Ventilation. ASHRAE
    Trans. 2015 Jul; 121(2):45–62.
74. Correia G, Rodrigues L, Gameiro da Silva M, Gonc¸alves T. Airborne route and bad use of ventilation
    systems as non-negligible factors in SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Med Hypotheses. 2020 Aug 1;
    141:109781. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2020.109781](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2020.109781) PMID: 32361528
75. Ho PL, Tang XP, Seto WH. SARS: hospital infection control and admission strategies. Respirology.
    2003; 8(s1):S41–5. [https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-1843.2003.00523.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-1843.2003.00523.x) PMID: 15018133
76. Liu F, Meyer AS, Hogan JF. Mainstreaming building energy efficiency codes in developing countries:
    Global experiences and lessons from early adopters. Vol. 204. World Bank Publications; 2010.
77. Pasquale S, Gregorio GL, Caterina A, Francesco C, Beatrice PM, Vincenzo P, et al. COVID-19 in Lowand Middle-Income Countries (LMICs): A Narrative Review from Prevention to Vaccination Strategy.
    Vaccines. 2021 Dec; 9(12):1477. [https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines9121477](https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines9121477) PMID: 34960223
78. Crews C, Angwaawie P, Abdul-Mumin A, Yabasin I b, Attivor E, Coffee M. Ambient carbon dioxide concentrations in health facilities in Ghana \[Internet\]. OSF; 2024 May. Available: osf.io/92thw

contribution/Comparing\_indoor\_air\_quality\_in\_naturally\_ventilated\_and\_air-conditioned\_hospitals\_in\_
the\_tropics/21168115/1