1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54

SUPPORTING INFORMATION
S1 Text. Supporting Information
Section A. Background information on indoor movement and transmission models
Section B. Experiment setting for static contacts
Section C. Description of SamenSlimOpen tool
Section D. Case study description
Section E. Parameter description in QVE-MOD
References for supporting information
Fig A. Screenshots of the SamenSlimOpen tool
Fig B. The case study restaurant layout
Fig C. The snapshot contamination map in the case study
Fig D. The contamination maps in the case study for ventilation and face mask scenarios
Fig E. The analysis of relative contribution of transmission routes in the case study
Fig F. Sensitivity analysis of emission rate
Fig G. Sensitivity analysis of proportions of aerosols
Fig H. Sensitivity analysis of virus decay rate on surfaces
Fig I. Sensitivity analysis of virus transfer rate between hand and surface
Fig J. Sensitivity analysis of fractional virus transfer rate from hand to facial membranes
Fig K. Sensitivity analysis of diffusion rate and deposition rate
Fig L. Sensitivity analysis of diffusion rate and virus decay rate in aerosols

Section A. Background information on indoor movement and transmission models
The following section describes the existing models. The first section (Section A.1) discusses the state-of-the-art

Section A. Background information on indoor movement and transmission models
The following section describes the existing models. The first section (Section A.1) discusses the state-of-the-art
pertaining pedestrian strategic and tactical choice models for indoor environments. Section Section A.2 continues
with an elaboration on simulation models for operational movement behaviour. Section Section A.3 reviews models
that simulate the spread of respiratory viruses in indoor spaces. This section ends with an overview of the attempts
to use pedestrian simulation models and virus spread models to determine SARS-CoV-2 transmission risks (Section
Section A.4).

Section A.1. Modelling pedestrian strategic and tactical choice behaviours
The movements of individuals are governed by choices at three levels, namely strategic (activity, activity location,

The movements of individuals are governed by choices at three levels, namely strategic (activity, activity location,
departure time choice), tactical (mode and route choice) and operational choices. In particular, this section will focus
on the state-of-the-art of activity and route choice behaviour literature because these two choices are influential in
the case of individuals' movement behaviour in indoor spaces. More specifically, we will focus on models that
determine the order of individuals’ activities and their routing.

Most studies focussed on activity choice modelling to represent the movements of pedestrians across city-scale
networks. Borgers and Timmermans (2010) were one of the first to develop a set of three connected models that
jointly identify pedestrian movements in shopping areas. Dijkstra and Jessurum (2016) simulate visitor’s activity
scheduling in shopping areas. Clifton et al. (2016) and Oyama and Hato (2018) determine pedestrian destination
choices in a city-network. Vukadinovic et al. (2011) developed an activity simulation model for another leisure
activity, namely theme parks. Danalet et al. (2014) and Danelet and Bierlaire (2014) adopted discrete choice models
to identify the restaurant choices and activity patterns of students and staff of the university.

* * *

55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109

the activity scheduling of individuals working in an office building. The transition probabilities were derived from
movement data inside the building.

What all of these activity location & scheduling modelling approaches have in common is that they require large
amounts of data to be correctly estimated and that they are often difficult to generalise. Yet, for indoor scenarios,
and specifically restaurants, little data is available regarding individuals’ activity scheduling. Thus, the modelling
approaches presented above are difficult to use. Yet, the literature also shows that if one can estimate the transition
probabilities between activities, the resulting activity scheduling behaviour is relatively realistic. Thus, in this first,
pragmatic attempt to model activity choices in restaurants, an expert-driven approach is adopted. For more
information, see section 5.1.

Section A.1.2. Route choice modelling

Early works on pedestrian route choice modelling, such as Hill (1984), indicate that route choice selection strategies

Early works on pedestrian route choice modelling, such as Hill (1984), indicate that route choice selection strategies
are largely subconscious, but that directness is the most commonly identified reason for choosing a particular route.
Various studies have afterwards identified the impact of the built environment on pedestrian route choices in cityscale networks (e.g., Borgers and Timmermans (2005), Guo et al. (2013), Lue and Miller (2019), Shatu et al. (2019)).
Often discrete choice models, such as the path size logic model and the multinomial probit models, are estimated.
Some, more data-driven approaches directly infer the likelihood of a given path based on a large set of realised
traces and their characteristics, such as speed distribution and nearby WiFi spots (e.g., Chen and Bierlaire (2015)).

74
75 Yet, with respect to indoor route choice behaviour, most works empirically studied indoor navigation, see Kalakou
76 and Moura (2014) for an overview. Additionally, some utility-based route choice models have been developed for
77 specific contexts (e.g., Cheung and Lam (1998), Hughes (2000), Hoogendoorn and Bovy (2005) and Daamen et al.
78 (2005)). Yet, given that the models are difficult to generalise and/or estimate due to their high data requirement.
79 Consequently, the shortest route towards one's destination is frequently adopted in simulation approaches. Often
80 local biases or forces are introduced to account for crowding at the scene (e.g., Campanella et al. (2009), Usher et
81 al. (2010)). The adoption of the shortest-distance path can, however, lead to unrealistic ‘suboptimal’ pedestrian
82 choice behaviour. Asano et al. (2010), Kretz et al. (2011) and Stubenschrott et al. (2014) developed more
83 sophisticated route choice models that determine the shortest path dynamically, thus improving local route choice.
84

Even though dynamic route choice models are most sophisticated, their computational effort is relatively high.
Moreover, in case of low demand locations (due to physical distancing restrictions), we expect the adverse effects
of suboptimal routing to be limited. Thus, because we favour fast computation times and expect limited routing
issues, this study will apply the utility-based routing approach presented by Hoogendoorn and Bovy (2004), also
coined NOMAD, to globally route pedestrians between activity locations.

The first two types both make use of a macroscopic representation of pedestrian flows, using the fundamental
relation between density and walking speed (P-FD) to determine the flow of pedestrians across boundaries. Graphbased models simulate the movements of pedestrians along a simplified graph (e.g., Chalmet et al. (1982), Hanseler
et al. (2017)) consisting of vertices and nodes. Continuous pedestrian simulation models discretize pedestrian spaces
in cells along 2 dimensions, but still make use of a continuous representation of pedestrian flows (Hughes (2000;
2002), Treuille et al. (2006)). Few macroscopic models can cope with heterogeneous crowds and multi-directional
traffic, amongst which Hoogendoorn et al. (2014), Tordeux et al. (2018). Continuous macroscopic models are best
used for scenarios where large crowds move through relatively confined simply-shaped spaces.

Section A.2. Modelling individuals’ operational movement dynamics
Over the years various pedestrian movement models have been presented. The level of details pertaining to the

Besides that, four major streams of microscopic pedestrian simulation models have been developed in the last four
decades. These models all simulate the movements of discrete pedestrians. Cellular automata models were first
2

* * *

110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164

developed by Blue and Adler (1998), and have been further specialized ever since (e.g., Song et al. (2005),
Schadschneider (2002), Sarmady (2010), Bandini et al (2011)). The environment is often spatially discretized in a
regular grid, which can limit CA’s validity in high-density situations and small or oddly shaped spaces. Force-based
models have been on the rise since the seminal paper of Helbing et al. (1995). This second model type determines
the next position of a pedestrian as the result of its current movement direction and force-based interactions with
other agents, its destination and its surrounding. This popular model type has seen many extensions, amongst which
other force-interpretations (e.g., Hoogendoorn and Bovy (2004)), interaction biases (e.g., Parisi et al. (2009), Chen
et al. (2020)), stairway behaviour (e.g., Qu et al. (2014)), corner rounding behaviour (e.g., Chen et al. (2020), Dias et
al. (2019)), travel time (Kretz et al. (2011)). Velocity-based models determine the next speed of an agent as the result
of the agent’s destination, kinetic energy dispensal, and collision-risk (Karamouzas and Overmars (2010), Mousssaid
et al. (2011), Paris et al. (2007)). Interactions directly influence the velocity of agent’s, which tends to make agents’
movements fairly unstable. The last type of microscopic model, i.e. discrete choice models, simulate pedestrians’
operational movements as an optimization of its choice utility (e.g., Antonini et al. (2004), Robin et al. (2009)), which
are the weighted sum of various elements of the potential next positions. This model type is not often applied, as it
is very difficult to create a flexible ‘simple’ movement model that can cope with the general interaction complexity
of public spaces.

For the modelling of virus transmission, a detailed description of pedestrians’ movements is essential. Thus, a
microscopic model is better suited to simulate the necessary movements. Additionally, most SARS-CoV-2
transmissions occur in indoor spaces, where a multitude of complex interaction behaviours occur. This vouches for
a microscopic model for which many specialist behaviours have already been implemented (e.g., force-base or
velocity-based). At the same time, the current physical distancing rules require the model to correctly simulate
complex social interactions at a distance (no physical forces). A force-based model is better equipped to handle
social interactions at a distance due to its setup. Thus, a generalisation of a force-base model will be used to simulate
the pedestrian choice and movement dynamics in indoor spaces, in particular NOMAD (Hoogendoorn and Bovy
(2004)) in the implementation of Campanella et al. (2014).

Section A.3. Modelling indoor transmission of respiratory viruses
Indoor transmission models have been developed to better understand transmission of respiratory viruses and

137 Section A.3. Modelling indoor transmission of respiratory viruses
138 Indoor transmission models have been developed to better understand transmission of respiratory viruses and
139 assess the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) (Kriegel et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021). Models
140 differ in the types and extent of heterogeneity that is taken into account. In general, three main aspects are
141 considered, namely i) the virus distribution in the environment, which can be assumed well-mixed or distributed in
142 space according to underlying biophysical mechanisms, and individual homogeneity or heterogeneity in terms of ii)
143 infectiousness and/or susceptibility, and iii) in terms of human movement. What model is best suited, depends on
144 the objectives of the research. In this section, we discuss the pros and cons of each model type.

145

In the most simple family of airborne transmission models, the Wells-Riley models, one assumes that infectious
particles are well-mixed and the quantities are at steady-state. It uses an analytical expression, the Wells-Riley
equation, to relate the number of infected and susceptible individuals in an indoor space, the ventilation rate and
the amount of infectious particles in the air to the expected number of new cases over a certain time period. Wells
(1955) used a hypothetical infectious dose unit “quantum of infection” to describe how many infectious particles an
infected individual emits. A quantum unit is defined as the number of infectious particles required to cause 63% of
people getting infected, and is usually back- calculated using data on numbers of individuals infected in well defined
indoor outbreaks. The Wells-Riley model has been extensively used for predicting the number of infected individuals
expected at large gatherings and assessing the effect of interventions such as capping the occupancy and reducing
the total event duration (Bazant and Bush 2021; Kriegel et al. 2021). It is often used for quick risk assessments of
large events. However, since every individual has the same risk of infection, the Wells-Riley models do not allow for
assessing the role of individual behaviours (contact frequency and respiratory activities e.g.,) on transmission risks.

* * *

165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219

particles and the room volume. The probability of infection occurring given exposure to a certain dose can be
modelled using mathematical formulations, e.g., exponential dose-response relationship (Sze To and Chao 2010).
This approach is more flexible than Wells-Riley models since it allows for individual-level heterogeneity in terms of
infectiousness, respiratory activities, and exposure time, and can be used to calculate individuals’ infection risk
(Lelieveld et al. 2020). This approach can be used to compare the relative exposure risk of common indoor
environments such as classroom and office (Jones et al. 2021). However, the assumed homogeneous spatial
distribution of infectious particles has the consequence that the distance between susceptible and infectious
individuals does not affect exposure to the virus. Therefore, as with the Wells-Riley models, the impact of physical
distancing cannot be evaluated with this family of models.

Recently, more detailed infectious dose models have been developed that allow for spatial variation of the
pathogen’s distribution in the environment as well as multiple transmission routes (Gao et al. 2021). Expansions of
the Wells-Riley model have been proposed that allow for individual heterogeneity in infectiousness and respiratory
activities (Bazant and Bush 2021; Xu et al. 2022), for spatial variation of the virus distribution in the environment
(Lau et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022), and the inclusion of multiple transmission routes (Gao et al. 2021). In addition to
airborne transmission, which was implicitly assumed in models mentioned above, these models consider
transmission via droplets (i.e., larger respiratory particles that do not remain airborne) and fomites (i.e.
contaminated objects). The inclusion of different transmission routes allows for increased granularity of the spatial
and temporal dynamics of respiratory disease pathogens in their environments. In an early example of this model
family, Nicas and Sun model virus-laden aerosols to be evenly distributed in a room, while viruses in droplets only
distribute near the infectious individual in their respiratory cone puff (Nicas and Sun 2006). The distribution of virus
on fomites in turn depends on the deposition of these viral-laden droplets and may accumulate in time depending
on the duration of stay of the infectious individual. This framework is formulated by discrete events and can be
expanded on the details of the various processes involved, such as pathogens emission, pathogens survival in the
environment, recipients’ uptake and causation of infection (Atkinson and Wein 2008; Li et al. 2009; Spicknall et al.
2010). Several event-based multiple routes infectious dose models have been built for COVID-19 (Arav et al. 2021;
Gao et al. 2021), which shed light on how dominant routes depend on the duration and distance of infectious
contacts.

Pedestrian movement models have been integrated with viral transmission models before. Sallah et al. (2017) built
a mathematical model that combines a graph-based mobility model and a SIR model to predict the spread of cholera
in Haiti. While this model simulated the spread on (sub)national levels, other models are focussed on small-scale
transmission, such as in indoor spaces. Harweg et al. (2021), Yang et al. (2020), Xiao et al. (2021), Romero et al.
(2020), Ronchi et al. (2020), Xu and Chraibi (2020) developed hybrid models that combine microscopic movement
models for simulating pedestrian dynamics with viral transmission models. Most often, the distance and duration
of, what is considered an infectious contact, is predefined. One group of hybrid models estimate the exposure time,
as it relates to different definitions of ‘risky contacts’. In the case of Xiao et al. (2021) a force-based model was built
to model pedestrian movement, and the total duration of risky contacts was calculated to assess the impact of
interventions such as shortening opening hours. Similarly, in Fang et al. (2020), the duration of risky contacts is
calculated based on cut-off distance, with different cut-off distances assumed for breathing and coughing (one metre
and two and a half metres, respectively). Ronchi et al. (2020) classified exposure into five types with different
distances, which reflect different transmission mechanisms. The exposure time for each type of exposure was
calculated to show the general exposure risk in the same indoor space.

Section A.4. Simultaneous modelling of individuals movement behaviour and SARS-CoV-2 transmission
The models summarised typically consider static contacts between infected and susceptible individuals and thereby
ignore the dynamic nature of human interactions. Combining detailed pedestrian models with viral transmission
models can counter this issue and help investigate the role of the contact networks in indoor spaces.

* * *

220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257
258
259
260
261
262
263
264
265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274

Another group of hybrid models estimates infection probabilities, either by defining a probability per risky contact
or assuming infection probabilities to be linearly related to the exposure time. Fang et al. (2020) applied an infection
probability curve that increases with the duration of the contact and assumed that people can get infected only
when they have close contact with infectious individuals (less than one metre), while Bouchnita and Jebrane (2020)
assumed a cut-off distance of two metres. The total exposure time is calculated based on cut-off distance and
compared to a confirmed duration within which close contact will definitely cause infection. Similarly, Ying and
O’Clery (2021) model the infection probability of an exposed customer as a linear function of the exposure time,
depending on the duration that the susceptible and the infectious agents spend in the same zone. The relation
between exposure and infection is, however, hard to calibrate against epidemiological data and often not done
explicitly.

Most hybrid models presented above predominantly assume contact transmission and ignore indirect transmission
routes such as via aerosols and fomites. We will add to the state-of-the-art by developing an individual-based model
that combines a pedestrian movement model and a multi-route transmission model. By allowing for spatial and
temporal heterogeneity in both human behaviour and viral spread, we aim to better understand the impact of
human behaviours on transmission risks.

Section B. Experiment setting for static contacts
In the static contact experiments (Fig 2), susceptible and infectious individuals stand still in a 10\*10 m indoor space.

In the static contact experiments (Fig 2), susceptible and infectious individuals stand still in a 10\*10 m indoor space.
There are tables next to both individuals, but individuals do not share any common surfaces. The benchmark contact
is defined as a scenario where susceptible and infectious individuals arrive concurrently in an indoor space and have
a contact at a distance of 1.5 metres for 15 minutes, which is broadly used as an indicator of ‘a risky contact’ (RIVM
2021). Both infectious and susceptible individuals are assumed to talk and breathe for 50% of the time each (akin to
an interaction in a restaurant for instance). The indoor space has an average ventilation level of 3 ACH (air change
per hour).

10^{\*}10

To examine the impact of contact intensity on exposure, we conduct three experiments in Section 3.1.1. The first
experiment compares exposure at different contact distances with the benchmark contact settings. The susceptible
individual is placed at different distances away from the infectious individuals, from 0.5 metres to 4 metres, to
examine the impact of contact distances. In the second experiment, we examine the impact of contact duration by
placing susceptible and infectious individuals in the indoor space for different durations from 5 mins to 120 mins,
while the rest of the settings are the same as the benchmark contact settings. Finally, we repeat the first two
experiments but introduce the infectious individual in the indoor space 3 hours prior to the susceptible individuals
to examine the impact of virus contamination accumulation in the environment on exposure.

We thereafter explored the impact of respiratory activities on transmission between static contacts. Compared to
breathing, active respiratory activities, such as singing and talking loudly, are associated with increased emission and
subsequent exposure to viral particles by proximate susceptible individuals (Hamner et al. 2020; Charlotte 2020).
Moreover, active respiratory activities result in higher tidal volume (inhalation rate), which can further increase virus
exposure. We used estimates from exhaled breath samples by (Coleman et al. 2022) and a systematic literature
review (Chen et al. 2021) to parametrize emission, particle composition, and inhalation upon different respiratory
activities (See Table 3). We simulated exposure upon the benchmark contact (1.5 metres for 15 minutes) as a result
of 15 minutes of the respective activity. Specifically, in the experiments in Section 3.1.2, the susceptible and
infectious individuals are placed in an indoor space with benchmark contact settings, and both the infectious and
susceptible individuals only conduct one type of respiratory activity for 15 minutes (either breathing, talking or
singing).

* * *

275
276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286
287
288
289
290
291
292
293
294
295
296
297
298
299
300
301
302
303
304
305
306

307
308
309
310
311
312
313

aerosols built up in the environment. In the first set of experiments in Section 3.1.3, susceptible and infectious
individuals are placed in a benchmark contact setting with half-time breathing and half-time talking. The ventilation
of the room is set to changing values from 0 to 25.

Lastly, in the second set of experiments in section 3.1.3, we examine the impact of different facemasks on exposure
in a benchmark contact. Face masks can influence both the emission and inhalation processes. The reduction of
emission and inhalation rate is determined by face masks’ filter efficiency (FE, the proportion of particles filtered
out) (Bezek et al. 2021; Drewnick et al. 2021). This depends on the materials used, among others, and can range
from as low as 20% for thin acrylic mask to more than 95% for N95 masks (Pan et al. 2020). Mask fit is also an
important indicator of FE (Darby et al. 2021). As face masks reduce the number of big particles more than small
particles emitted by breathing and talking (Asadi et al. 2020), we assume that face masks reduce the large particles
ten times more efficiently than they do small particles (i.e., (1-FEdroplets) = 10\*(1-FEaerosols)) (Asadi et al. 2020). Unless
otherwise stated, we used the filter efficiency values given in Table 3 in the experiments. Additionally, we simulated
a benchmark contact with both infectious and susceptible individuals wearing a mask with FE ranging from 0% to
100% for aerosols and the corresponding FE for the droplets.

(1.F E\_{a r o1o o s}})=10^{+}(1.F F\_{a a t o o s o1})

Section C. Description of SamenSlimOpen tool

The PeDViS model is also available as an online tool (see SamenSlimOpen.nl/de-tool for the latest release),

The PeDViS model is also available as an online tool (see SamenSlimOpen.nl/de-tool for the latest release),
specialised for impact assessment of restaurants (see Fig A). Fig A presents a visualisation of the web-based interface
via which users can design and simulate a restaurant. Users are asked to make a simplified representation of their
venue in an accessible manner. The users can select a scenario or make one themselves which determines the length
of the simulation and the occupancy over time, among others. After setting up their restaurant, the users start the
simulation. The output of the simulation is a heatmap of the cumulative virus exposures that occurred over the
course of the simulation, as well as summary statistics of the simulation.

The goal of the SamenSlimOpen project is not only to inform users about the relative virus exposure risks of their
current setup but also to learn about what measures to use in conjunction to limit SARS-CoV-2 transmission in their
venue. The SSO app allows users to try different configurations and compare results. Users can change their
restaurant layout or change the scenario: the occupancy, how long guests are staying, or what measures are taken.

Table A. Implemented measures in the SSO app to limit SARS-CoV-2 transmission

| Measure | Option A | Option B |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Face masks | Guests don't wear masks | Guests wear masks when they walk |
| Payment | At the register | At the table |
| Coats | On the coat rack | Taken to the table |
| Shifts | Tables are used multiple times per evening | Tables are used once per evening |
| Air change rate | A continuous slider which sets the times of air change per hour |  |
| Cleaning tables | A continuous slider which sets the interval time of tables being cleaned |  |

In order for the SSO app to simulate, the user input for the PeDVis model is collected in the graphical user interface.
The user first identifies the layout of the restaurant. Here, the location of all objects and functional spaces (e.g.,
toilet, coat rack, cash register) are determined. All objects can be scaled and rotated to best resemble the layout of
their restaurant. The number of tables and chairs placed in the restaurant constrain the number and sizes of groups
that can be accommodated in the restaurant. Moreover, their placement and size affect the walking routes of the
simulated individuals. Accordingly, the user indicates the actual maximum occupancy, the average duration of stay

* * *

Multi-dimensional challenges of controlling indoor respiratory virus transmission

314 in the restaurant, and the time slots at which groups are expected to arrive at the restaurant. Lastly, the user can 315 indicate whether to use intervention measures, including wearing face masks when walking (Table A). 316 317 **Section D. Case study description** 318 In the presented case study, the SSO app was used to create the restaurant scenario’s. The underlying PeDViS model 319 was then used to simulate and compare the impact of various measures to limit SARS-CoV-2 spread in restaurants. 320 321 For this case study, a small (10 \* 9 meters) conceptual restaurant is adopted (Fig B). The restaurant contains four 322 tables, which are distributed over the space. Each table has four chairs, all of which can be simultaneously occupied 323 by visitors. The restaurant also has a bar with four stools. The capacity is determined by the number of chairs/stools 324 in the restaurant, so twenty visitors can be present simultaneously . The main entrance and exit of the restaurant 325 are on the northern side of the restaurant, with a coat rack next to the entrance. The cash register is on the left side 326 of the bar, and two toilets are located on the southern side of the restaurant. The material of the chairs, tables, and 327 bar is assumed to be wood. The objects in the room are disinfected one time before the restaurant opens, and not 328 cleaned again during the following six-hour shift. 329 330 At the restaurant, the main activity of all individuals is sitting on a chair. Besides that, individuals can perform three 331 intermediate activities. They can hang their coat on the coat rack, go to the toilet, or pay at the cash register. In the 332 case study below, all individuals hang their coats on chairs and pay at tables. The probability that an individual visits 333 the toilet is assumed to be 0.6. The timing to go to the toilet is random, and the time spent there is drawn from a 334 normal gaussian distribution with a mean of 120 seconds and a standard deviation of 60 seconds, with a maximum 335 of 240 seconds. Consequently, individuals move to these two locations and thereafter move back to their main 336 activity location. 337 338 The simulated walking behaviour of the population is homogeneous in all aspects, except for the desired walking 339 speed. In particular, the same parameter settings are used for each individual in the crowd. As a result, all agents 340 have a similar mass, understanding of the surrounding space, collision avoidance, rotation, and acceleration 341 behaviour. For each individual, the desired walking speed is drawn from a normal gaussian distribution with a mean 342 speed of 0.9 m/s and a standard deviation of 0.2 m/s. The maximum speed is set to 1.4 m/s. They are not obliged to 343 comply with the 1.5 metre distancing rules, which means individuals will use all available space to move. This is in 344 line with observations from crowd monitoring that individuals in confined indoor spaces have difficulty complying 345 to distancing rules and no big differences in pedestrian behaviour despite the introduction of distancing measures 346 (van Schaik et al. 2022; Villena Gonzales 2022). 347 348 The simulation lasts for 6 hours of service at a restaurant, in which some tables are used twice. Thus, in one complete 349 simulation run, 32 individuals have entered the simulation. At the end of the simulation, some individuals might still 350 be present in the restaurant. 351 352 Only one infectious individual enters the simulation during its runtime, which is randomly assigned at the beginning 353 of QVEmod. For that reason, the SSO app normally runs in multiple replications and then generates results for the 354 expected number of infections. However, for the case study results to be comparable, being infectious is assigned 355 to a fixed agent (ID= 9), the time spent by whom at the restaurant corresponds to approximately the middle part of 356 the simulation runtime (enters the restaurant approximately at the beginning of the 2nd hour and leaves at the 357 beginning of the 4th hour) (Fig 5C), and sits on a table which is approximately in the middle of the restaurant (Fig 358 5A). All other characteristics are similar to that of other individuals and are randomly drawn at the entrance of the 359 simulation. 360 361 **Section E. Parameter description in QVE-MOD** 362 363 **Emission rate (ω) represents the relative viral load of an infector emitting per hour. In the case study, ω is scaled to** 1 per hour for a typical infectious person with a typical respiratory activity for the restaurant context, which is assumed to be half-time breathing and half-time talking.

* * *

367
368
369
370
371
372
373
374
375
376
377
378
379
380
381
382
383
384
385
386
387
388
389
390
391
392
393
394
395
396
397
398
399
400
401
402
403
404
405
406
407
408
409
410
411
412
413
414
415
416
417
418
419

6
Emission quantity (φ) is set to a default value of 10 copies per hour. This value is based on work done by Ma et al.
(2020). They collected 20 minutes of exhaled breath samples from COVID-19 patients and estimated emissions to
5 7
range from 1.13 _10 to 2.25_ 10 copies per hour (Ma et al. 2020). This range was in agreement with other studies
including that of (Evans 2020), who measured viral load in the saliva (1000 /nl) and multiplied this with the average
5
volume of emitted saliva per hour (330 nl/hour). This resulted in estimates of around 3.3 _10 copies per hour, when_
_people spend half of their time talking and the other half breathing (Evans 2020). A more recent study quantified_
_7_
_that the emission rate from omicron patients is around 5_ 10 copies per hour (Zheng et al. 2022). In general,
emission rates are highly heterogenous between individuals and will vary over the course of the infection (Chen et
5 7
al. 2021). To reflect this, we performed a sensitivity analysis spanning emission rates for 10 to 10 copies (Fig F).

10^{6}

(\\phi)

2.25^{\*}10^{7}

3.3^{\*}10^{5}

5^{\*}10^{7}

10^{5}

10^{7}

Respiratory activity scaler (δ) is a relative scale representing the differences in emission rates among different
respiratory activities. It is quantified based on work by Coleman et al. (2022) who specified the relative difference of
RNA copies in breath samples (n=13) during the different respiratory activities. According to the study, an individual
singing emits 16415.5 RNA copies during 15 minutes of continuous singing, while emitting 12655.9 RNA copies during
15 minutes of talking and 1959.3 copies during 30 minutes of tidal breathing. These findings indicate that singing
and talking result in 16.7 times and 12.9 times more viral particle emissions, respectively, compared to breathing. In
our simulation experiments, the default respiratory activity is defined as half-time breathing and half-time talking
and the corresponding respiratory activity scaler (δ) is set to 1. The respiratory activity scaler for other scenarios can
be calculated based on the emission rates of different activities relative to the default activity. We used the findings
from Coleman et al. (2022) in our simulation experiments to calculate these relative activity scalers. Other studies
that shed light on the relative emission by respiratory activity include (Gregson et al. 2021; Mürbe et al. 2021;
Schijven et al. 2021). These measured the particle mass, but not the virus amount emitted, during different
respiratory activities and were considered less direct estimates for this parameter.

The infectiousness scaler (σ) is used to scale individual infectiousness. 0 represents a susceptible individual who
cannot emit the virus and 1 represents a “typical infectious” individual. Values of σ that are greatly larger than 1 can
be used to reflect super-shedding individuals.

The proportions of aerosols (paerosols) and droplets (pdroplets) during emission represent how the emitted viral
particles are partitioned in aerosols and droplets, respectively. These were parameterized based on three factors: i)
a predetermined cut-off size between aerosols and droplets, ii) the relative amounts of aerosols and droplets
expelled by humans, and iii) the difference in viral copies carried by aerosol and droplet particles (Chen et al. 2021).
According to the results presented in the systematic literature review studies (Pöhlker et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2021),
particles can be classified into droplets (>100um), buoyant aerosols (<10um), short-range aerosols (50um<d<100um)
and long-range aerosols (10um<d<50um). Recent studies that used laser particle counters to quantify the respiratory
particles’ size distribution among different respiratory activities showed that most of the particles could be classified
as aerosols having small sizes (Mürbe et al. 2021). In our study, we defined one cut-off size for the particles, and
classified them into two categories: i) buoyant aerosol particles having a dry size of < 10um (assumed to float in the
air layer), and ii) droplets having a dry size of > 10um (assumed to float in the air first but then fall onto the surface
layer in time). The calculated proportions in different respiratory activities and the corresponding respiratory activity
scaler values are listed in Table B. When different scenarios require changing the composition of respiratory
activities, the proportions can be recalculated by considering the duration-based weights of each activity and the
corresponding respiratory activity scaler. For example, paerosols in a scenario including a different set of respiratory
activities can be calculated as shown below.

(\\boldsymbol{p}\_{d r o p l e t s})

(p\_{a e r o s o l s})

(<10u)

p\_{a e r o s o l,s c e n a r i o(a c t i v i t y)}=\\frac{\\sum p\_{a e r o s o l,a c t i v i t y}\*\\delta\_{a c t i v i t y}\*d u r a t i o n\_{a c t i v i t y}}{\\sum\\delta\_{a c t i v i t y}\*d u r a t i o n\_{a c t i v i t y}}

For sensitivity analysis purposes, we tested the impact of different proportions of aerosols and droplets on our case
study results and reperformed the case study simulations with changing aerosol proportions of 50% lower and higher
values with corresponding droplet proportions (Fig G).

* * *

422
423
424
425
426
427
428
429
430
431
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
439
440
441
442
443
444
445
446
447
448
449
450
451
452
453
454
455
456
457
458
459
460
461
462

420
421

Table B. The proportions of particles in aerosols and droplets among different respiratory activities

| Scenario | Paerosols | Pdroplets | Respiratory activity scaler |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Talking | 17.1% | 82.9% | 1.86 |
| Singing | 6.52% | 93.48% | 2.4 |
| Breathing | 97.8% | 2.2% | 0.14 |
| Half-time breathing+ half-time talking | 22.9% | 77.1% | 1 |

Unit decay rates of virus on surfaces (µfomites) and aerosols (µaerosols) were set based on experimental studies
investigating the stability of SARS-CoV-2 in the environment. The survival of SARS-CoV-2 in different environmental
conditions depends on the type of surface, the presence of organic matrix, temperature, and humidity (Chin et al.
2020; Ijaz et al. 2021; Kasloff et al. 2021; Pastorino et al. 2020; Matson et al. 2020; Harbourt et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2021b; Riddell et al. 2020; Ranjan 2022). The viral particles lose infectiousness at decay rates that depend on the
environment and the surface material. The decay rates can be calculated based on experimental studies estimating
the half-life of particles.

(\\mu\_{a e r o s o l s})

(\\mu\_{f o m i t e s})

430
-1
431 In our case study, the main material used for the surfaces is wood, with an exponential decay rate of 0.969 hr (Chin
432 et al. 2020). The surface types in our model are configurable to common materials used in restaurant settings, such
433 as plastic, glass, cloth, paper, cardboard, copper, and steel, and the corresponding decay rates are calculated using
434 literature (van Doremalen et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021b). Considering the range of decay rates on different surfaces, a
435 sensitivity analysis was performed within the -90% and +90% range of the base decay rate (Fig H).
436

Estimates for decay rates of SARS-CoV-2 particles in aerosols vary greatly. According to van Doremalen et al. (2020),
using TCID50 experiments, SARS-CoV-2 can survive in the suspended aerosols for a few hours with a median half-life
-1
of 1.09 hours which corresponds to an exponential decay rate of 0.636 hr. In another study with TCID50
experiments, Smither et al. (2020) observed half-life durations between 0.50-1.25 hours (indicating decay rates
-1
between 0.555-1.386 hr) using tissue culture media under different relative humidity conditions. Dabisch et al.
o
(2021) found that in an environment without sunlight at 30 C temperature and 70% relative humidity (which
represents an approximate condition that can also be observed in indoor settings), the time needed for a 90%
-1
decrease in infectious virus is 35 minutes, which corresponds to a decay rate of 3.947 hr. In a more recent study,
Oswin et al. (2022) found that the airborne infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 falls to 50% within 5 seconds on average in
medium humidity conditions and 5 minutes in high humidity conditions, and observed a decrease in infectivity to
-1
approximately 10% in 20 minutes in both cases, which corresponds to a decay rate as high as 6.908 hr. Considering
-1
this range of estimates, we applied a default decay rate of 1.5 hr, which corresponds to a half life of about half an
hour. To assess the sensitivity to this assumption, we applied aerosol decay rates 50% lower and higher than the
default to our case study (Fig I). Since the decay rate is directly related to how long aerosols remain airborne and
thus how far they get to travel, we performed the sensitivity analysis of the aerosol decay rate across levels of the
diffusion coefficient (Fig I).
Infectious dose (Dinf) is the minimum dose needed to reach the target cells to cause an infection. It is set to 1000

3.947h mathsf{r}^{-1}

croutes is the proportion of viral particles someone is exposed to that reach the respiratory tract cells by route
(aerosols, droplets, fomites). The baseline c values are assumed to be 10% for all the transmission routes based on
the model analysis results in presented Section 3.2.3 and given in Table 1. This assumption aligns with other
modelling studies and studies on aerosol deposition in lungs (Zuo et al. 2020; Hinds 1999; Kraay et al. 2021).

6.908h r^{-1}

1.5,h r^{-1}

* * *

463
464
465
466
467
468
469
470
471
472
473
474
475
476
477
478
479
480
481
482
483
484
485
486
487
488
489
490
491
492
493
494
495
496
497
498
499
500
501
502
503
504
505
506
507
508
509
510
511
512
513
514

The volume of a cell (L) is the volume of a grid cell, with a default value of 125 L, since each side of grid cells has a
default length of 0.5 m.

Air change rate (ACH) is a measure of how many times the air in a defined space is fully replaced per hour. In our
study, it takes values between 0-24 depending on the simulation experiment settings. ACH is estimated to be
between 0.5 to 1.5 inside houses and between 3 to 15 with windows open (CIRES 2020).

Filter efficiency (FE) represents the proportion of particles filtered out in case of mask use. In our model, FE is used
to calculate the reduction of emission and inhalation rate. The baseline FE is assumed to be 40% for aerosols (Ueki
et al. 2020) and 94% for droplets. Here, we assume that the FE of both particle types are related according to
(1-FEdroplets = 10%\*(1- FEaerosols).

(1\ F F\_{a r o1o l s})=10%((1\ F F\_{a a e10s01s})

Unit deposition rate of viruses in droplets (µdroplets) is the deposition rate of droplets from the air layer onto surfaces.
This is a physical process where the sedimentation time depends on the height, and particle size (Xie et al. 2007).
The sedimentation time is proportional to the particle size d: (1/d2). In this study, particles with d>10 um are
classified as droplets. The average sedimentation time of these particles is calculated by using the distribution of the
particle sizes that vary across different respiratory activities. In order to estimate the average sedimentation time,
the particle size distribution data were extracted from the distribution figures for different activities (Morawska et
al. 2009). The corresponding sedimentation time for each particle size was paired and the expected average
sedimentation times were calculated for each respiratory activity based on the probability distribution of particle
sizes. Considering the particle size distribution during each activity, the average sedimentation time for breathing,
talking, and singing activities are calculated as 88.22 s, 101.64 s, and 137.46 s, respectively. Then, the corresponding
deposition rates are quantified as 40.8 per hour, 35.4 per hour, and 20.18 per hour. Since the baseline scenario
represents half an hour of breathing and half an hour of talking, the deposition rate in the baseline scenario is
calculated as 37.93 per hour or otherwise put, half of the particles have deposited after 0.8 minutes.

Diffusion coefficient (D) defines how fast viruses diffuse in the air. Both droplets and aerosols can disperse into their
surroundings. For diffusion equations, we adapted a model from Vuorinen et al. (2020), who investigated aerosol
transport in indoor spaces and built a Monte-Carlo model to incorporate spatial-temporal aerosol dispersion. The
diffusion coefficient used in Vuorinen et al. (2020) is D = 0.05 m2/s, whereas an experimental study reports that the
effective diffusion coefficient value for aerosol particles is 0.0016 m2/s (Kudryashova et al. 2015). A later study
suggests that the effective diffusion coefficient for SARS-CoV-2 can be set to 0.0016 m2/s, but can be high as 0.01
m2/s when the convection is high in the indoor space (Kudryashova et al. 2021). We set D to 0.0016 m2/s as our
baseline estimate and performed a sensitivity analysis for the case study with 0.01 m2/s, which is approximately 6
times faster than the baseline, as well as a diffusion coefficient value that is 6 times smaller than the baseline (Fig I
and Fig J). As mentioned previously, since the diffusion coefficient is directly related to the time spent by the particles
in a grid cell in the air, the sensitivity analysis of diffusion coefficients is performed with the combined effects of
changing aerosol decay rate (Fig I) and droplet deposition rate (Fig J) values.

D=0.05,\\mathsf{m}^{2}/\\mathsf{s},

{\\mathsf{m}}^{2}/{\\mathsf{s}},

0.4^{\*}12=4.8\\downarrow{

,0.0016;\\tilde{\\mathfrak{m}^{2}}/\\mathfrak{s}

m^{2}/s

:\\rho/\\mathrm{L}

* * *

515
516
517
518
519
520
521
522
523
524
525
526
527
528
529
530
531
532
533
534
535
536
537
538
539
540
541
542
543
544
545
546
547
548
549
550
551
552
553
554
555
556
557
558
559
560
561
562
563
564
565
566
567
568

Proportion of pathogen secreted to hands (η) represents the proportion of pathogen contamination that is
deposited on infectious agents’ hands as a result of virus emission. It is quantified as 0.15 (Kraay et al. 2018; Li et al.
2021).

Ratio of finger pad size over the reachable surface area (π), transfer efficiency between hands and surfaces (θ),
and surface touching frequency (γ) constitute the parameter set defining the virus transfer rate between hands and
surfaces. Hands can constitute an important route for SARS-CoV-2 transmission (Lin et al. 2022) and viruses on
infectious people’s hands can be transferred to surfaces (Winther et al. 2007).

The ratio of finger pad size over the reachable surface area (π) is calculated as 0.0196, which is the result of the
calculation (average hand area _fraction of hand area used for transfer)/reachable surface area. The average hand_
_size is set to 0.0049 m2 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2011; Beamer et al. 2015; Wilson et al. 2021), the_
_fraction of hand area used for transfer is set to 0.1 (AuYeung et al. 2008), and the reachable surface area is calculated_
_as 0.5_ 0.5 = 0.25 metre squares based on the reachable distance assumption of 0.5 metres.

0.0049m^{2}

:0.5^{\*}0.5=0.25

The transfer efficiency between hands and surfaces (θ) depends on the surface materials. No empirical data is
available on the transfer efficiency for SARS-CoV-2, but it is assumed to be diverse (Marzoli et al. 2021; Belluco et al.
2021). For instance, transfer efficiency was observed to change between <0.01%-80% for bacteriophages (Rusin et
al. 2002). Julian et al. (2010) conducted an experiment on the transfer of virus between hands and glass in both
directions and found the mean transfer efficiency to be 0.23 with a standard deviation of 0.22 using microphages.
Some SARS-CoV-2 modelling studies (Harvey et al. 2021; Pitol and Julian 2021) refer to Pitol et al. (2017) and use the
empirical transfer efficiency data for the transfer of bacteriophage MS2 from hand to saliva, which has a mean of
0.20. The transfer efficiency is also highly dependent on virus species. (Liu et al. 2013) examined transfer efficiency
for norovirus and found that 0.25 of hand rinses samples are positive. We applied a transfer efficiency value of 0.25
per transfer.

The frequency of touching surfaces (γ) in a restaurant is estimated as 0.25 per minute (Lei et al. 2020), which
corresponds to 15 touches per hour.

Monitoring data is being collected to get a more thorough and empirical understanding of this parameter in various
settings and between individuals. Zhang et al. (2021) recently examined video data related to a restaurant associated
with a COVID-19 outbreak in Guangzhou. The data shows that touch frequency for closer surfaces can go up to
10^(1.41) = 25.7. Therefore, we conducted a sensitivity analysis for the combination of virus transfer parameters
(πθγ) within the range of -75% and +75% (Fig K).

Fractional virus transfer rate from hands to facial membranes (ε) is a parameter that is hard to quantify due to the
absence of relevant data. The virus transfer rate from hands to facial membranes can be modelled by considering
four components: (i) the touching surface ratio between the hands and facial membranes, (ii) the frequency of
touching the face, (iii) the virus transfer efficiency from hands to face, and (iv) the inactivation rate of virus on the
skin. Due to identifiability issues of these four components, the virus transfer rate from hands to facial membranes
is defined as an aggregate value of these four. The reduction of particles on the hand that results from transfer to
facial membranes is not considered as a separate process, but rather assumed small enough to be covered within
the inactivation rate on the skin in the calculation of ε.

For the parameters of (iii) transfer efficiency between hands and face and (iv) the inactivation rate on the skin,
reliable pathogen-specific data are not available (Kraay et al. 2021). For (iii) transfer efficiency, some SARS-CoV-2
modelling studies (Harvey et al. 2021; Pitol and Julian 2021) refer to Pitol et al. (2017) and use the empirical transfer

* * *

569
570
571
572
573
574
575
576
577
578
579
580
581
582
583
584
585
586
587
588
589
590
591
592
593
594
595
596
597
598
599
600
601
602
603
604
605
606
607
608
609
610
611
612
613
614
615
616
617
618
619
620
621
622
623

efficiency data for the transfer of bacteriophage MS2 from hand to saliva, which has a mean of 0.20. Some others
(e.g., Wilson et al. 2021, King et al. 2022) refer to the transfer efficiency of phage PRD-1 in Rusin et al. (2002), which
has a mean of 0.339.

For the (iv) inactivation rate on skin, some SARS-CoV-2 modelling studies (e.g., Li et al., 2021) refer to the inactivation
rate values used in MERS and other coronavirus related modelling studies (Xiao et al. 2018; Wolff et al. 2005), which
-1
corresponds to an exponential decay rate of 0.8 hr, while some other researchers (e.g., Kraay et al. 2021) refer to
-1
the inactivation rate of influenza (Weber and Stilianakis 2008; Nicas and Jones 2009) which corresponds to 88 hr.
These two values differ by two orders of magnitude.

In this context, ε can be calculated as follows:
ε (1/hr) = touching surface ratio between the hands and facial membranes (cm2

580 ε (1/hr) = touching surface ratio between the hands and facial membranes (cm2/cm2) \* frequency of touching the
581 face (touch/hr) \* virus transfer efficiency from hands to face (1/touch) \* exp (- inactivation rate (1/hr) \* time (hr))
582

The calculation using the above-described estimates results in a fractional transfer rate of 0%-3.5%. Given the
substantial uncertainty around this metric, we performed a sensitivity analysis over a wider range. The base value
for effective hand-to-face transfer rate is assumed to be 1% (i.e., 1% of the virus on hands effectively reaches to
facial membranes on the average), and then a sensitivity analysis is conducted for 0.1%, 0.5%, 5% and 10% (Fig L).

(c\ m{^2}/c m^{2})

REFERENCES FOR SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Antonini, Gianluca, Michel Bierlaire, and Mats Weber. 2004. “Simulation of Pedestrian Behaviour Using a Discrete Choice Model
Calibrated on Actual Motion Data.” In 4th Swiss Transport Research Conference. [https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/87094](https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/87094).
Arav, Yehuda, Ziv Klausner, and Eyal Fattal. 2021. "Theoretical investigation of pre-symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 person-to-person
transmission in households." Scientific reports 11, no. 1: 14488.
Arboportaal. 2020. “Luchtverversing.” Arboportaal. April 16, 2020. [https://www.arboportaal.nl/onderwerpen/luchtverversing](https://www.arboportaal.nl/onderwerpen/luchtverversing).
Asadi, Sima, Christopher D. Cappa, Santiago Barreda, Anthony S. Wexler, Nicole M. Bouvier, and William D. Ristenpart. 2020.
“Efficacy of Masks and Face Coverings in Controlling Outward Aerosol Particle Emission from Expiratory Activities.” Scientific
Reports 10 (1): 15665.
Asano, Miho, Takamasa Iryo, and Masao Kuwahara. 2010. “Microscopic Pedestrian Simulation Model Combined with a Tactical
Model for Route Choice Behaviour.” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 18 (6): 842–55.
Atkinson, Michael P., and Lawrence M. Wein. 2008. “Quantifying the Routes of Transmission for Pandemic Influenza.” Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology 70 (3): 820–67.
AuYeung, Willa, Robert A. Canales, and James O. Leckie. 2008. “The Fraction of Total Hand Surface Area Involved in Young
Children’s Outdoor Hand-to-Object Contacts.” Environmental Research 108 (3): 294–99.
Bandini, Stefania, Federico Rubagotti, Giuseppe Vizzari, and Kenichiro Shimura. 2011. “A Cellular Automata Based Model for
Pedestrian and Group Dynamics: Motivations and First Experiments.” In Parallel Computing Technologies, 125–39. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.
Bazant, Martin Z., and John W. M. Bush. 2021. “A Guideline to Limit Indoor Airborne Transmission of COVID-19.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118 (17). [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2018995118](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2018995118).
Beamer, Paloma I., Kevin R. Plotkin, Charles P. Gerba, Laura Y. Sifuentes, David W. Koenig, and Kelly A. Reynolds. 2015. “Modeling
of Human Viruses on Hands and Risk of Infection in an Office Workplace Using Micro-Activity Data.” Journal of Occupational
and Environmental Hygiene 12 (4): 266–75.
Belluco, Simone, Marzia Mancin, Filippo Marzoli, Alessio Bortolami, Eva Mazzetto, Alessandra Pezzuto, Michela Favretti, Calogero
Terregino, Francesco Bonfante, and Roberto Piro. 2021. “Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA on Inanimate Surfaces: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.” European Journal of Epidemiology 36 (7): 685–707.
Bernardi, Niclo Francesco, S. Snow, Isabelle Peretz, H. D. Orozco Perez, Nilufar Sabet-Kassouf, and Alexandre Lehmann. 2017.
“Cardiorespiratory Optimization during Improvised Singing and Toning.” Scientific Reports 7 (1): 8113.
Bezek, Lindsey B., Jin Pan, Charbel Harb, Callie E. Zawaski, Bemnet Molla, Joseph R. Kubalak, Linsey C. Marr, and Christopher B.
Williams. 2021. “Additively Manufactured Respirators: Quantifying Particle Transmission and Identifying System-Level
Challenges for Improving Filtration Efficiency.” Journal of Manufacturing Systems, January.
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.01.002).
Blue, Victor J., and Jeffrey L. Adler. 1998. “Emergent Fundamental Pedestrian Flows from Cellular Automata Microsimulation.”
Transportation Research Record 1644 (1): 29–36.
Borgers, Aloys, and Harry J. P. Timmermans. 2005. “Modelling Pedestrian Behaviour in Downtown Shopping Areas.” In 10th
International Conference on Computers in Urban Planning and Urban Management, London, United Kingdom.
12

589 Antonini, Gianluca, Michel Bierlaire, and Mats Weber. 2004. “Simulation of Pedestrian Behaviour Using a Discrete Choice Model
590 Calibrated on Actual Motion Data.” In 4th Swiss Transport Research Conference. [https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/87094](https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/87094).
591 Arav, Yehuda, Ziv Klausner, and Eyal Fattal. 2021. "Theoretical investigation of pre-symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 person-to-person
592 transmission in households." Scientific reports 11, no. 1: 14488.
593 Arboportaal. 2020. “Luchtverversing.” Arboportaal. April 16, 2020. [https://www.arboportaal.nl/onderwerpen/luchtverversing](https://www.arboportaal.nl/onderwerpen/luchtverversing).
594 Asadi, Sima, Christopher D. Cappa, Santiago Barreda, Anthony S. Wexler, Nicole M. Bouvier, and William D. Ristenpart. 2020.
595 “Efficacy of Masks and Face Coverings in Controlling Outward Aerosol Particle Emission from Expiratory Activities.” Scientific
596 Reports 10 (1): 15665.
597 Asano, Miho, Takamasa Iryo, and Masao Kuwahara. 2010. “Microscopic Pedestrian Simulation Model Combined with a Tactical
598 Model for Route Choice Behaviour.” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 18 (6): 842–55.
599 Atkinson, Michael P., and Lawrence M. Wein. 2008. “Quantifying the Routes of Transmission for Pandemic Influenza.” Bulletin of
600 Mathematical Biology 70 (3): 820–67.
601 AuYeung, Willa, Robert A. Canales, and James O. Leckie. 2008. “The Fraction of Total Hand Surface Area Involved in Young
602 Children’s Outdoor Hand-to-Object Contacts.” Environmental Research 108 (3): 294–99.
603 Bandini, Stefania, Federico Rubagotti, Giuseppe Vizzari, and Kenichiro Shimura. 2011. “A Cellular Automata Based Model for
604 Pedestrian and Group Dynamics: Motivations and First Experiments.” In Parallel Computing Technologies, 125–39. Springer
605 Berlin Heidelberg.
606 Bazant, Martin Z., and John W. M. Bush. 2021. “A Guideline to Limit Indoor Airborne Transmission of COVID-19.” Proceedings of
607 the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118 (17). [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2018995118](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2018995118).
608 Beamer, Paloma I., Kevin R. Plotkin, Charles P. Gerba, Laura Y. Sifuentes, David W. Koenig, and Kelly A. Reynolds. 2015. “Modeling
609 of Human Viruses on Hands and Risk of Infection in an Office Workplace Using Micro-Activity Data.” Journal of Occupational
610 and Environmental Hygiene 12 (4): 266–75.
611 Belluco, Simone, Marzia Mancin, Filippo Marzoli, Alessio Bortolami, Eva Mazzetto, Alessandra Pezzuto, Michela Favretti, Calogero
612 Terregino, Francesco Bonfante, and Roberto Piro. 2021. “Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA on Inanimate Surfaces: A Systematic
613 Review and Meta-Analysis.” European Journal of Epidemiology 36 (7): 685–707.
614 Bernardi, Niclo Francesco, S. Snow, Isabelle Peretz, H. D. Orozco Perez, Nilufar Sabet-Kassouf, and Alexandre Lehmann. 2017.
615 “Cardiorespiratory Optimization during Improvised Singing and Toning.” Scientific Reports 7 (1): 8113.
616 Bezek, Lindsey B., Jin Pan, Charbel Harb, Callie E. Zawaski, Bemnet Molla, Joseph R. Kubalak, Linsey C. Marr, and Christopher B.
617 Williams. 2021. “Additively Manufactured Respirators: Quantifying Particle Transmission and Identifying System-Level
618 Challenges for Improving Filtration Efficiency.” Journal of Manufacturing Systems, January.
619 [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.01.002).
620 Blue, Victor J., and Jeffrey L. Adler. 1998. “Emergent Fundamental Pedestrian Flows from Cellular Automata Microsimulation.”
621 Transportation Research Record 1644 (1): 29–36.
622 Borgers, Aloys, and Harry J. P. Timmermans. 2005. “Modelling Pedestrian Behaviour in Downtown Shopping Areas.” In 10th
623 International Conference on Computers in Urban Planning and Urban Management, London, United Kingdom.
12

* * *

Multi-dimensional challenges of controlling indoor respiratory virus transmission

627 City Shopping Areas.” Geographical Analysis 18 (2): 115–28. 628 Bouchnita, Anass, and Aissam Jebrane. 2020. “A Multi-Scale Model Quantifies the Impact of Limited Movement of the Population

* * *

688
689
690
691
692
693
694
695
696
697
698
699
700
701

688 Gregson, Florence K. A., Natalie A. Watson, Christopher M. Orton, Allen E. Haddrell, Lauren P. McCarthy, Thomas J. R. Finnie, Nick
689 Gent, et al. 2021. “Comparing Aerosol Concentrations and Particle Size Distributions Generated by Singing, Speaking and
690 Breathing.” Aerosol Science and Technology: The Journal of the American Association for Aerosol Research 55 (6): 681–91.
691 Guo, Zhan, and Becky P. Y. Loo. 2013. “Pedestrian Environment and Route Choice: Evidence from New York City and Hong Kong.”
692 Journal of Transport Geography 28 (April): 124–36.
693 Hallett, Sasha, Fadi Toro, and John V. Ashurst. 2020. “Physiology, Tidal Volume.” In StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls
694 Publishing.
695 Hamner, Lea, Polly Dubbel, Ian Capron, Andy Ross, Amber Jordan, Jaxon Lee, Joanne Lynn, et al. 2020. “High SARS-CoV-2 Attack
696 Rate Following Exposure at a Choir Practice - Skagit County, Washington, March 2020.” MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality
697 Weekly Report 69 (19): 606–10.
698 Hänseler, Flurin S., William H. K. Lam, Michel Bierlaire, Gael Lederrey, and Marija Nikolić. 2017. “A Dynamic Network Loading
699 Model for Anisotropic and Congested Pedestrian Flows.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 95 (January): 149–
700 68.
701 Harbourt, David E., Andrew D. Haddow, Ashley E. Piper, Holly Bloomfield, Brian J. Kearney, David Fetterer, Kathleen Gibson, and
14

* * *

749
750
751
752
753
754
755
756
757
758
759
760
761
762
763
764
765
766
767
768
769
770
771
772
773
774
775
776
777
778

Pathogens.” BMC Infectious Diseases 18 (1): 540.
Kretz, Tobias, Andree Große, Stefan Hengst, Lukas Kautzsch, Andrej Pohlmann, and Peter Vortisch. 2011. “QUICKEST PATHS IN
SIMULATIONS OF PEDESTRIANS.” Advances in Complex Systems 14 (05): 733–59.
Kriegel, Martin, Anne Hartmann, Udo Buchholz, Janna Seifried, Sigrid Baumgarte, and Petra Gastmeier. 2021. “SARS-CoV-2
Aerosol Transmission Indoors: A Closer Look at Viral Load, Infectivity, the Effectiveness of Preventive Measures and a Simple
Approach for Practical Recommendations.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19 (1): 220.
Kudryashova, Olga B., N. V. Korovina, A. A. Pavlenko, V. A. Arkhipov, V. D. Golʹdin, and E. V. Muravlev . 2015. “Aerosol Cloud
Propagation in a Closed Space.” Journal of Engineering Physics and Thermophysics 88 (3): 568–74.
Kudryashova, Olga B., Evgeny V. Muravlev, Aleksandra A. Antonnikova, and Sergey S. Titov. 2021. “Propagation of Viral
Bioaerosols Indoors.” PloS One 16 (1): e0244983.
Kwok, Yen Lee Angela, Jan Gralton, and Mary-Louise McLaws. 2015. “Face Touching: A Frequent Habit That Has Implications for
Hand Hygiene.” American Journal of Infection Control 43 (2): 112–14.
Lau, Zechariah, Ian M. Griffiths, Aaron English, and Katerina Kaouri. 2022. “Predicting the Spatio-Temporal Infection Risk in Indoor
Spaces Using an Efficient Airborne Transmission Model.” Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences. [https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2021.0383](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2021.0383).
Lei, Hao, Shenglan Xiao, Benjamin J. Cowling, and Yuguo Li. 2020. “Hand Hygiene and Surface Cleaning Should Be Paired for
Prevention of Fomite Transmission.” Indoor Air 30 (1): 49–59.
Lelieveld, Jos, Frank Helleis, Stephan Borrmann, Yafang Cheng, Frank Drewnick, Gerald Haug, Thomas Klimach, Jean Sciare, Hang
Su, and Ulrich Pöschl. 2020. “Model Calculations of Aerosol Transmission and Infection Risk of COVID-19 in Indoor
Environments.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17 (21).
[https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17218114](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17218114).
Li, Sheng, Joseph N. S. Eisenberg, Ian H. Spicknall, and James S. Koopman. 2009. “Dynamics and Control of Infections Transmitted
from Person to Person through the Environment.” American Journal of Epidemiology 170 (2): 257–65.
Li, Shuai, Yifang Xu, Jiannan Cai, Da Hu, and Qiang He. 2021. “Integrated Environment-Occupant-Pathogen Information Modeling
to Assess and Communicate Room-Level Outbreak Risks of Infectious Diseases.” Building and Environment 187 (January):
107394.
Li, Xiangdong, Daniel Lester, Gary Rosengarten, Craig Aboltins, Milan Patel, and Ivan Cole. 2022. “A Spatiotemporally Resolved
Infection Risk Model for Airborne Transmission of COVID-19 Variants in Indoor Spaces.” The Science of the Total Environment
812 (March): 152592.
Lin, Yi-Chan, Rebecca J. Malott, Linda Ward, Linet Kiplagat, Kanti Pabbaraju, Kara Gill, Byron M. Berenger, et al. 2022. “Detection
15

* * *

810 Adolescents Voices during Speaking, Singing and Shouting.” PloS One 16 (2): e0246819.
811 Nicas, Mark, and Daniel Best. 2008. “A Study Quantifying the Hand-to-Face Contact Rate and Its Potential Application to Predicting
812 Respiratory Tract Infection.” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 5 (6): 347–52.
813 Nicas, Mark, and Gang Sun. 2006. “An Integrated Model of Infection Risk in a Health-Care Environment.” Risk Analysis: An Official
814 Publication of the Society for Risk Analysis 26 (4): 1085–96.
815 Nicas, Mark, and Rachael M. Jones. 2009. “Relative Contributions of Four Exposure Pathways to Influenza Infection Risk.” Risk
816 Analysis: An Official Publication of the Society for Risk Analysis 29 (9): 1292–1303.
817 Oswin, Henry P., Allen E. Haddrell, Mara Otero-Fernandez, Jamie F. S. Mann, Tristan A. Cogan, Thomas G. Hilditch, Jianghan Tian,
818 et al. 2022. “The Dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 Infectivity with Changes in Aerosol Microenvironment.” Proceedings of the
819 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 119 (27): e2200109119.
820 Oyama, Yuki, and Eiji Hato. 2018. “Pedestrian Activity Model Based on Implicit Path Enumaration.” In 21st International
821 Conference of Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies: Smart Transportation, HKSTS 2016, 331–38. Hong Kong Society
822 for Transportation Studies Limited.
823 Pan, Jin, Charbel Harb, Weinan Leng, and Linsey C. Marr. 2020. “Inward and Outward Effectiveness of Cloth Masks, a Surgical
824 Mask, and a Face Shield.” [https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/handle/10919/100918](https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/handle/10919/100918).
825 Paris, Sébastien, Julien Pettré, and Stéphane Donikian. 2007. “Pedestrian Reactive Navigation for Crowd Simulation: A Predictive
826 Approach.” Computer Graphics Forum: Journal of the European Association for Computer Graphics.
827 [https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2007.01090.x?casa\_token=Jq6NAUJx3SIAAAAA:eXTNo-m-](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2007.01090.x?casa_token=Jq6NAUJx3SIAAAAA:eXTNo-m-)
828 na9\_Rysya4C60InIMdqJJ-1d1\_jxhcy8oETVvn8Nwci7urkEPdn8lUKg\_Ih9FgmLiF-fKKM.
829 Parisi, Daniel R., Marcelo Gilman, and Herman Moldovan. 2009. “A Modification of the Social Force Model Can Reproduce
830 Experimental Data of Pedestrian Flows in Normal Conditions.” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications 388 (17):
831 3600–3608.
832 Pastorino, Boris, Franck Touret, Magali Gilles, Xavier de Lamballerie, and Rémi N. Charrel. 2020. “Prolonged Infectivity of SARS-
833 CoV-2 in Fomites.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 26 (9): 2256–57.
834 Pitol, Ana K., Heather N. Bischel, Tamar Kohn, and Timothy R. Julian. 2017. “Virus Transfer at the Skin–Liquid Interface.”
835 Environmental Science & Technology 51 (24): 14417–25.
836 Pitol, Ana K., and Timothy R. Julian. 2021. “Community Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 by Surfaces: Risks and Risk Reduction
837 Strategies.” Environmental Science & Technology Letters 8 (3): 263–69.
838 Pleil, Joachim D., M. Ariel Geer Wallace, Michael D. Davis, and Christopher M. Matty. 2021. "The physics of human breathing:
839 Flow, timing, volume, and pressure parameters for normal, on-demand, and ventilator respiration." Journal of breath
840 research 15, no. 4: 042002. [https://doi.org/10.1088/1752-7163/ac2589](https://doi.org/10.1088/1752-7163/ac2589).
841 Popa, Alexandra, Jakob-Wendelin Genger, Michael D. Nicholson, Thomas Penz, Daniela Schmid, Stephan W. Aberle, Benedikt
842 Agerer, et al. 2020. “Genomic Epidemiology of Superspreading Events in Austria Reveals Mutational Dynamics and
843 Transmission Properties of SARS-CoV-2.” Science Translational Medicine 12 (573).
844 [https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abe2555](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abe2555).
845 Pöhlker, Mira L., Christopher Pöhlker, Ovid O. Krüger, Jan-David Förster, Thomas Berkemeier, Wolfgang Elbert, Janine Fröhlich-
846 Nowoisky et al. 2023. "Respiratory aerosols and droplets in the transmission of infectious diseases." Reviews of Modern
847 Physics 95, no. 4: 045001.
848 Qu, Yunchao, Ziyou Gao, Yao Xiao, and Xingang Li. 2014. “Modeling the Pedestrian’s Movement and Simulating Evacuation
849 Dynamics on Stairs.” Safety Science 70 (December): 189–201.
850 Ranjan, Koushlesh. 2022. “Environmental Persistence of SARS-CoV-2 and Disinfection of Work Surfaces in View of Pandemic
851 Outbreak of COVID-19.” [https://www.intechopen.com/online-first/81375](https://www.intechopen.com/online-first/81375).
852 Ren, Chen, Chang Xi, Junqi Wang, Zhuangbo Feng, Fuzhan Nasiri, Shi-Jie Cao, and Fariborz Haghighat. 2021. “Mitigating COVID-
853 19 Infection Disease Transmission in Indoor Environment Using Physical Barriers.” Sustainable Cities and Society 74
854 (November): 103175.
855 Riddell, Shane, Sarah Goldie, Andrew Hill, Debbie Eagles, and Trevor W. Drew. 2020. “The Effect of Temperature on Persistence
856 of SARS-CoV-2 on Common Surfaces.” Virology Journal 17 (1): 145.
857 RIVM. 2020. “Ventilatie En COVID-19.” RIVM. August 21, 2020. [https://lci.rivm.nl/ventilatie-en-covid-19](https://lci.rivm.nl/ventilatie-en-covid-19).
858 ———. 2021. “Nederlandse Aanpak En Maatregelen Tegen Het Coronavirus.” Rijksoverheid.nl. January 25, 2021.
16

* * *

871
872
873
874
875
876
877
878
879
880
881
882
883
884
885
886
887
888
889
890
891
892
893
894

871 7.
872 Sarmady, Siamak, Fazilah Haron, and Abdullah Zawawi Talib. 2010. “Simulating Crowd Movements Using Fine Grid Cellular
873 Automata.” In 2010 12th International Conference on Computer Modelling and Simulation, 428–33.
874 Schadschneider, Andreas, Ansgar Kirchner, and Katsuhiro Nishinari. 2002. “CA Approach to Collective Phenomena in Pedestrian
875 Dynamics.” In Cellular Automata, 239–48. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
876 Schijven, Jack, Lucie C. Vermeulen, Arno Swart, Adam Meijer, Erwin Duizer, and Ana Maria de Roda Husman. 2021. “Quantitative
877 Microbial Risk Assessment for Airborne Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 via Breathing, Speaking, Singing, Coughing, and
878 Sneezing.” Environmental Health Perspectives 129 (4): 47002.
879 Shatu, Farjana, Tan Yigitcanlar, and Jonathan Bunker. 2019. “Objective vs. Subjective Measures of Street Environments in
880 Pedestrian Route Choice Behaviour: Discrepancy and Correlates of Non-Concordance.” Transportation Research Part A:
881 Policy and Practice 126 (August): 1–23.
882 Shelat, Sanmay, Winnie Daamen, Bjorn Kaag, Dorine Duives, and Serge Hoogendoorn. 2020. “A Markov-Chain Activity-Based
883 Model for Pedestrians in Office Buildings.” Collective Dynamics 5 (0): 423–30.
884 Smither, Sophie J., Lin S. Eastaugh, James S. Findlay, and Mark S. Lever. 2020. “Experimental Aerosol Survival of SARS-CoV-2 in
885 Artificial Saliva and Tissue Culture Media at Medium and High Humidity.” Emerging Microbes & Infections 9 (1): 1415–17.
886 Song, Weiguo, Yanfei Yu, Weicheng Fan, and Heping Zhang. 2005. “A Cellular Automata Evacuation Model Considering Friction
887 and Repulsion.” Science in China. Series E: Engineering & Materials Science 48 (4): 403–13.
888 Spicknall, Ian H., James S. Koopman, Mark Nicas, Josep M. Pujol, Sheng Li, and Joseph N. S. Eisenberg. 2010. “Informing Optimal
889 Environmental Influenza Interventions: How the Host, Agent, and Environment Alter Dominant Routes of Transmission.”
890 PLoS Computational Biology 6 (10): e1000969.
891 Stubenschrott, Martin, Christian Kogler, Thomas Matyus, and Stefan Seer. 2014. “A Dynamic Pedestrian Route Choice Model
892 Validated in a High Density Subway Station.” Transportation Research Procedia 2 (January): 376–84.
893 Sze To, Gin Nam, and Christopher Yu Hang Chao. 2010. “Review and Comparison between the Wells-Riley and Dose-Response
894 Approaches to Risk Assessment of Infectious Respiratory Diseases.” Indoor Air 20 (1): 2–16.
17

* * *

Multi-dimensional challenges of controlling indoor respiratory virus transmission

932 933 934 935 936 937 938 939 940 941 942 943 944 945 946 947 948 949

_American Journal of Infection Control 49 (6): 846–48._ Winther, Birgit, Karen McCue, Kathleen Ashe, Joseph R. Rubino, and J. Owen Hendley. 2007. “Environmental Contamination with Rhinovirus and Transfer to Fingers of Healthy Individuals by Daily Life Activity.” Journal of Medical Virology 79 (10): 1606–

Wolff, Manfred H., Syed A. Sattar, Olusola Adegbunrin, and Jason Tetro. 2005. “Environmental Survival and Microbicide Inactivation of Coronaviruses.” In Coronaviruses with Special Emphasis on First Insights Concerning SARS, edited by Axel Schmidt, Olaf Weber, and Manfred H. Wolff, 201–12. Basel: Birkhäuser Basel. Xiao, Shenglan, Yuguo Li, Minki Sung, Jianjian Wei, and Zifeng Yang. 2018. “A Study of the Probable Transmission Routes of MERS- CoV during the First Hospital Outbreak in the Republic of Korea.” Indoor Air 28 (1): 51–63. Xiao, Yao, Mofeng Yang, Zheng Zhu, Hai Yang, Lei Zhang, and Sepehr Ghader. 2021. “Modeling Indoor-Level Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Pedestrian Dynamics-Based Microscopic Simulation Approach.” Transport _Policy 109 (August): 12–23._ Xie, X., Y. Li, A. T. Y. Chwang, P. L. Ho, and W. H. Seto. 2007. “How Far Droplets Can Move in Indoor Environments--Revisiting the Wells Evaporation-Falling Curve.” Indoor Air 17 (3): 211–25. Xu, Chunwen, Wenbing Liu, Xilian Luo, Xingyu Huang, and Peter V. Nielsen. 2022. “Prediction and Control of Aerosol Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Ventilated Context: From Source to Receptor.” Sustainable Cities and Society 76 (January): 103416. Xu, Qiancheng, and Mohcine Chraibi. 2020. “On the Effectiveness of the Measures in Supermarkets for Reducing Contact among Customers during COVID-19 Period.” Sustainability: Science Practice and Policy 12 (22): 9385.

* * *

967
968
969
970
971
972
973

A - Landing page

B - Scenario selection

964
965
966

C - Scenario modelling

D - Demand input

Fig A. Visuals of the SamenSlimOpen app.
A) introduction screen, B) scene selection screen, C) scene development screen, D) developed scenario.

Fig B. The case study restaurant layout.
The green rectangles and round brown circles signify the seats, the green arrows the entrances, the blue toilets the

The green rectangles and round brown circles signify the seats, the green arrows the entrances, the blue toilets the
entrance to the toilets and the brown rectangles the tables.

* * *

974
975
976
977
978
979
980

Fig C. Snapshot of contamination maps in the case study.
Virus contamination in the environment in aerosols, droplets, and on fomites over time in minutes. Contamination

Virus contamination in the environment in aerosols, droplets, and on fomites over time in minutes. Contamination
is expressed as the virion quantity relative to an average infectious individual’s hourly emission.

* * *

982
983
984
985
986
987
988
989

Fig D. Snapshots of contamination maps in the case study for ventilation and face mask scenarios.
(A,B,C) are the scenarios where individuals do not wear face masks and ACH is 0 per hour in the restaurant in (A), 3
in (B), and 6 in (C). (D, E) are the scenarios where people wear face masks while moving and ACH is 3 per hour in the
restaurant in (D) and 6 in (E). Within each scenario, the impact of intervention on viral spread is presented: (a, b, c)
show virus concentration in the aerosols, droplets, and fomites, respectively.

({\\mathsf{A}},{\\mathsf{B}},{\\mathsf{C}})

* * *

Multi-dimensional challenges of controlling indoor respiratory virus transmission

990 991

992 993 **Fig E. The analysis of relative contribution of transmission routes in the case study.** Each row shows a parameters setting for c _route_ (A) c _route_ is the same for all routes (c _aerosols_:c _droplets_:c

* * *

1005
1006
1007
1008
1009
1010
1011

Fig F. Sensitivity analysis of emission rate.

1012
1013
1014
1015
1016
1017
1018
1019

The distributions of the expected number of infected individuals in the case study with different emission quantities
φ. (A) to (E) show the results for changing φ values from 10^5 to 10^7. This may reflect the heterogeneity in viral
load of the index patients. The black solid lines indicate the mean value of the infected number in the baseline
scenario and the dashed lines show the mean value corresponding to each respective scenario.

\\phi.

\\phi

10^{\\wedge}5

10\ ^{\\wedge}7

Fig G. Sensitivity analysis of proportions of aerosols.
The distributions of the expected number of infected individuals in the case study with different proportions of virus
emitted in the form of aerosols . In the baseline scenario, paerosols is 22.91%. (A) to (E) shows the results for from 50%
lower to 50% higher (namely 11.45%, 17.18%, 22.91%, 28.63%, 34.37%) representing the heterogeneity due to
respiratory activities or individual variation. The black solid lines indicate the mean value of the infected number in
the baseline scenario and the dashed lines show the mean value corresponding to each respective scenario.

,p\_{a e r o s o l}

\\mu\_{s u r f a c e s}

* * *

1029
1030
1031
1032
1033
1034
1035
1036
1037
1038
1039
1040

Fig I. Sensitivity analysis of diffusion rate and virus decay rate in aerosols.
The distributions of the expected number of infected individuals in the case study with different diffusion rates D

The distributions of the expected number of infected individuals in the case study with different diffusion rates D
and virus decay rates in aerosols µaerosols. Each row shows a parameter setting for diffusion: (A) Diffusion rate is
0.000278 m2/s, 6 times smaller than the baseline scenario. (B) Diffusion rate is at the baseline scenario 0.0016m2/s.
(C) Diffusion rate is 0.01 m2/s as an upper bound from literature (Kudryashova et al. 2021), 6 times larger than the
baseline scenario. Each column shows a parameter setting for virus decay rate in aerosols µaerosols. (a) Decay rate is
0.755/hour, 50% lower than the baseline scenario (b) Decay rate is 1.51/hour as the baseline scenario. (c) Decay rate
is 2.27/hour, 50% higher than the baseline scenario. The black solid lines indicate the mean value of the infected
number in the baseline scenario and the dashed lines show the mean value corresponding to each respective
scenario.

0.0016{\\sf m{}}^{{}2}/{\\sf{s}}.

\\mu\_{a e r o s o l s}

0.000278;\\mathsf{m}^{2}/\\mathsf{s},

\\mu\_{a e r o s o l s}

0.01,\\mathsf{m}^{2}/\\mathsf{s}

* * *

1041
1042
1043
1044
1045
1046
1047
1048
1049
1050
1051
1052
1053
1054

Bb

Cc

Fig J. Sensitivity analysis of diffusion rate and deposition rate for droplets.
The distributions of the expected number of infected individuals in the case study with different diffusion rates

The distributions of the expected number of infected individuals in the case study with different diffusion rates
and deposition rates µdroplets. Each row shows a parameter setting for diffusion: (A) Diffusion rate is 0.000278 m2/s,
6 times smaller than the baseline scenario. (B) Diffusion rate is at the baseline scenario 0.0016m2/s. (C) Diffusion
rate is 0.01 m2/s as an upper bound from literature (Kudryashova et al. 2021), 6 times larger than the baseline
scenario. Each column shows a parameter setting for deposition: (a) Deposition rate is 18.97/hour, 50% lower than
the baseline scenario (b) Deposition rate is 37.93/hour as baseline scenario. (c) Deposition rate is 56.90/hour, 50%
higher than the baseline scenario. The black solid lines indicate the mean value of the infected number in the
baseline scenario and the dashed lines show the mean value corresponding to each respective scenario.

0.000278;\\mathsf{m}^{2}/\\mathsf{s},

0.0016{\\sf m{}}^{{}2}/{\\sf{s}}.

{\\mathfrak{m}}^{2}/{\\mathfrak{s}}

* * *

1055
1056
1057
1058
1059
1060
1061
1062
1063

1064
1065
1066
1067
1068
1069
1070

Fig K. Sensitivity analysis of virus transfer rate between hand and surface.
The distributions of the expected number of infected individuals in the case study with different virus transfer rates
between hand and surface (πσγ). The baseline transfer rate between hand and surface is 0.0735 (0.0196 _0.25_ 15)
per hour. (A) to (E) shows the results for changing transfer rates from 75% lower to 75% higher (namely 0.0184,
0.0368, 0.0735, 0.1103, 0.1286 per hour) representing the heterogeneity of touching surface behaviour. The black
solid lines indicate the mean value of the infected number in the baseline scenario and the dashed lines show the
mean value corresponding to each respective scenario.

(0.0196^{ _}0.25^{_}15)

Fig L. Sensitivity analysis of fractional virus transfer rate from hand to facial membranes.
The distributions of the expected number of infected individuals in the case study with different fractional virus
transfer rates from hand to facial membranes ε. The baseline transfer rate from hand to facial membranes is 1%. (A)
to (E) shows the results for changing ε from 0.1%, 0.5%, 1%, 5% and 10% representing the heterogeneity of touch
face behaviour. The black solid lines indicate the mean value of the infected number in the baseline scenario and
the dashed lines show the mean value corresponding to each respective scenario.