RESEARCH ARTICLE

Process evaluation of Tuberculosis infection
control and prevention practice at public
health facilities in Tegede district, Northwest
Ethiopia: Facility-based cross-sectional design

Endalkachew Mesfin GebeyehuID1\*, Ashagere Mebratu2, Asmamaw Atnafu2,
Asebe Hagos2

OPEN ACCESS

1 Department of Health System Management, School of Public Health, College of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Wollo University, Dessie, Ethiopia, 2 Department of Health System and Policy, College of Medicine
and Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia

Citation: Gebeyehu EM, Mebratu A, Atnafu A,
Hagos A (2025) Process evaluation of Tuberculosis
infection control and prevention practice at public
health facilities in Tegede district, Northwest
Ethiopia: Facility-based cross-sectional design.
PLoS ONE 20(2): e0314514. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.1371/journal.pone.0314514

Abbreviations: AFB, Acid-Fast Bacilli; BCC,
Behavioral Change Communication; DR, : Drug

Editor: Frederick Quinn, The University of Georgia,
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Data Availability Statement: All relevant data are
within the paper and its Supporting Information
files.

- [endalkmes12@gmail.com](mailto:endalkmes12@gmail.com)

Accepted: November 11, 2024
Published: February 14, 2025

Published: February 14, 2025

Tuberculosis Infection Prevention and Control practice (TB-IPC) is crucial to prevent nosocomial transmission of Tuberculosis (TB), especially in high-burden settings like Ethiopia.
However, studies show that TB infection control practices among healthcare workers in Ethiopia are suboptimal. The study aims to evaluate TB-IPC practices at public health facilities
in Tegede district, Northwest Ethiopia.

Background

A facility-based cross-sectional design with mixed methods and a formative approach was
used to evaluate the TB-IPC from May 1 to June 30, 2023. The practice was assessed using
availability, compliance, and acceptability dimensions with 31 indicators. The quantitative
data was collected from 525 clients using structured questionnaires. The data were coded,
entered into EpiData version 4.6, and exported to SPSS version 25 for analysis. Binary and
multivariable logistic regression analyses were used to identify the predictor variables associated with client satisfaction. Furthermore, non-participatory direct observations, document
reviews, and resource inventories were conducted. In the qualitative study, key informants
were interviewed, and qualitative data were transcribed, translated, coded, and analyzed
manually in themes.

* * *

Resistance; EPSA, Ethiopian Pharmaceutical
Supply Agency; HC/HF, Health Centers/Health
Facilities; HH, Household; HIV, Human
Immunodeficiency Virus; ICE, Information
Communication and Education; IPC, Infection
Prevention and Control; MDR, Multidrug Resistant;
MUAC, Mid Upper Arm Circumference; NGO, Non-
Governmental organization; OPD, Outpatient
Department; Pre-XDR, Pre-Extensively Drug
Resistance; RH, Rifampicin and Isoniazid; TB,
Tuberculosis; TPT, Therapeutic Preventive Therapy;
WHO, World Health Organization; XDR, Extensively
Drug Resistance.

a 95% CI \[22.0%, 29.4%\], were satisfied with TB-IPC practices at public health centers in
Tegede district.

Conclusion

The overall implementation of TB-IPC practices at public health facilities in Tegede district is
currently poor and requires urgent improvement. Based on stakeholders’ judgment criteria,
the dimensions of availability, compliance, and acceptability were rated as poor, fair, and
poor, respectively. These findings provide a baseline understanding of how TB-IPC practices are implemented in Tegede district.

Background

Tuberculosis is one of the top ten causes of death worldwide and the leading cause of death
from a single source of infection \[1\]. According to the 2023 WHO Global TB Report, Ethiopia
reported approximately 10 million TB infections globally, with an estimated 1.6 million deaths
due to TB in 2021. The incidence of TB in Ethiopia was reported at 172 cases per 100,000 population, and the TB/HIV co-infection rate was approximately 12% \[2\].
The World Health Organization’s (WHO) End TB Strategy, approved by the World Health

The World Health Organization’s (WHO) End TB Strategy, approved by the World Health
Assembly in 2014 and updated on December 16, 2022, calls for a 90% reduction in TB deaths
and an 80% decrease in the TB incidence rate by 2030 using 2015 as a baseline. The strategy
emphasizes the need for prevention across all approaches, including infection prevention and
control (IPC) in health care services and other settings where the risk of Mycobacterium tuberculosis transmission is high \[3\].
Tuberculosis remains a major global public health threat, and the End TB Strategy and

Tuberculosis remains a major global public health threat, and the End TB Strategy and
United Nations targets for TB are all progress towards targets are behind schedule. The
COVID-19 pandemic aggravated an already suboptimal global TB response, so achieving TB
targets will require optimized use of existing tools and new tools \[4\]. In Ethiopia, TB infection
prevention and control are growing in importance because of the association of TB with HIV
and the emergence of DR-TB. An increasing number of patients, lack of infrastructure, and
insufficient healthcare staffing has led to overcrowding, delays in diagnosis, and inadequate
treatment, resulting in increased TB transmission \[5\].
The major drivers of TB remain undernutrition, poverty, diabetes, tobacco smoking, and

Ethiopia is one of the most TB-burden countries, and TB remains a challenging problem
even though the Ethiopian government has been working over the past decades to enhance
TB-IPC activities. Even though global and national guidelines have been published, and
healthcare workers (HCWs) have received training, TB-IPC practices have been assessed in
various regions of Ethiopia, including the Tegede region. Throughout Ethiopia, the rates of
implementing TB-IPC measures have varied widely. Studies have shown that implementation
rates range from 34% in health centers in Southern Ethiopia \[8\] to 74% in hospitals in Addis
Ababa \[9\]. These variations highlight the challenges in standardizing TB-IPC practices across
different healthcare settings.

* * *

Ethiopia is among the 30 high-TB burden countries identified by the WHO. According to
the WHO, Ethiopia had an estimated 151,000 new TB cases in 2021, with a significant number
of these cases being drug-resistant. The high prevalence underscores the need for robust TB
infection control practices to prevent transmission, especially in high-risk areas such as healthcare facilities and densely populated communities \[10\]. Patients and providers are therefore at
risk of exposure to TB, especially at high-case-load health facilities where TB patients and suspected cases stay longer for inpatient or outpatient follow-up care. The risk to others is magnified if the patients do not receive the proper treatment and IPC guidelines are not followed.
Tuberculosis is vastly contagious in resource-limited healthcare facilities, and Health Care
Workers (HCWs) are at increased risk of acquiring TB in such settings \[11\].
Tuberculosis infection control is a combination of measures designed to minimize the risk

Tuberculosis infection control is a combination of measures designed to minimize the risk
of TB transmission within populations. Healthcare workers are not sufficiently protected from
tuberculosis infection in healthcare facilities where infection control protocols are not followed
completely \[3\].
There are health system influences on TB-IPC implementation referred to as availability,

There are health system influences on TB-IPC implementation referred to as availability,
knowledge, and educational development of staff, timeliness of service delivery, availability of
equipment, such as respirators and masks, space for patient separation, funding, and TB-IPC
information, education, and communication materials and tools (8). One of the biggest problems with local community health continues to be the airborne transmission of TB. In the district health institutions, tuberculosis infection prevention and control procedures have long
been implemented ineffectively.
The evaluation of TB-IPC practice at public health facilities in Tegede district, Northwest Ethi-

The evaluation of TB-IPC practice at public health facilities in Tegede district, Northwest Ethiopia, was necessary for several reasons: TB is highly prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, including
Ethiopia, making the risk of infection transmission high in these countries. Effective TB-IPC practices are crucial to prevent nosocomial transmission of TB among patients and healthcare workers
\[12, 13\]. Healthcare workers are at risk of exposure to TB, especially at high-caseload facilities.
Therefore, it is essential to assess and improve TB-IPC practices to prevent transmission and
ensure patient safety \[14\]. The aim was not solely driven by stakeholders’ demands. However, the
evaluation of TB-IPC practices was initiated at their request to identify gaps and areas for
improvement. The main stakeholders for this program are described in Table 1.

| A Stakeholders | Role in the program | Interest in the evaluation | Role in the evaluation | Communication strategy | Level of importance |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Healthcare providers | Providing service (program implementers) | Understanding the program implementation status and improving service delivery | Providing information | Face to face & written Formal letters | High |
| The service beneficiaries (clients). | Information providing about TB infection prevention and control services | Complete and quality information provision | Information providing | Face-to-face | High |
| Tegede district health center directors(4 HC directors) | conducting supervisionbudget allocation | Identification of gaps& fulfilling resources | support | support | high |
| Tegede District Health Office | Met national targetsCapacity building | Performance improvement | and | and | medium |
| NGO(USAID TB Elimination) | Technical supportMonitoring(plan,report,supervision,and review meeting) | Service Quality improvementService access to Community | support | support | medium |

The TB-IPC logic model is presented in Fig 1: TB-IPC Logical Model of Public Health Facilities in Tegede District, Northwest Ethiopia, 2023.
A conceptual framework to evaluate TB-IPC at public health facilities in Tegede district is displayed in Fig 2: A conceptual framework to evaluate TB-IPC at public
health facilities in Tegede district, northwest Ethiopia, 2023 \[15\].

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Process evaluation of Tuberculosis infection control and prevention practice

**Fig 1. TB-IPC Logical model of Tegede district, Northwest Ethiopia, 2023.**

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.g001)

## Evaluation methods and materials

**Evaluation area and period.** The evaluation study was conducted at four health centers in Tegede district, Northwest Ethiopia, from May 1 to June 30, 2023. The district is located in the central Gondar zone, 114 km and 862 km away from Gondar City and Addis Ababa (the capi- tal city of Ethiopia), respectively. According to the 2015 E.C. population estimates, the district’s total population was 98,927. Tegede district has 23 health posts, 4 health centers, and 1 primary hospital that provides preventive and curative health services to the community. A total of 325 healthcare providers are assigned to provide health services in the district’s health facilities. The health facilities offer TB screening, diagnostic, and treatment services. **Evaluation approach.** A formative evaluation approach was employed to assess TB-IPC practices at public health facilities in the Tedege District. This method aimed to identify imple- mentation challenges and opportunities for improvement, thereby enhancing TB-IPC prac- tices and achieving program goals. Given that the TB-IPC program is currently in the implementation stage, this approach was considered suitable for the evaluation. **Evaluation design.** A facility-based cross-sectional study design with concurrent embed- ded mixed methods was conducted. Most importantly, the mixed methods approach integrates

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514) February 14, 2025 4 / 19

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Process evaluation of Tuberculosis infection control and prevention practice

**Fig 2. A conceptual framework to evaluate TB-IPC at public health facilities in Tegede district, northwest Ethiopia, 2023.**

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.g002)

statistical analyses with data obtained from interviews, observations, or surveys, which allows researchers an opportunity to provide a more refined understanding of the topic. **Focus of evaluation and dimensions.** The evaluation focuses on the scope of imple- mented TB-IPC activities, and the experiences of providers and patients. Dimensions refer to the key aspects or characteristics that are assessed to determine how well the TB-IPC practice is being implemented and achieving its goals. Dimensions help to break down complex sys- tems into measurable parts, making it easier to evaluate and understand the program. Therefore, availability, compliance, and acceptability dimensions were used to evaluate the implementation of TB-IPC practice. These dimensions are used to address the evaluation objective and evaluation questions \[3, 16, 17\]. **Sample size determination and sampling procedures.** Resource Inventory: OPD, TB clinic, and laboratory classes were observed using an adapted checklist from May 1 to June 30,

2023. Document review: documents such as the IPC meeting agenda, focal person assignment let- ter, contact register, unit-TB register, TB presumptive register, AFB request, TB follow-up cards, and TB screening tools were reviewed retrospectively from January 1, 2023, to March 30, 2023. Direct observation: a total of 60 non-participatory observations were conducted using a structured observation checklist. Five observation sessions in each of the three OPD units from four health centers were conducted to assess TB screening activities in the OPD using the opportunistic sampling technique.
      PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514) February 14, 2025 5 / 19

* * *

Table 2. Sample size determination for factors by using factors associated with clients’ satisfaction with TB-IPC, 2023.

| Variables | Percent of outcome in unexposed | Unexposed to an exposed ratio | OR | Assumptions |  | Non-response rate | Sample size |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CI | Power |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Education | 68.2 | 1:1 | 1.9 | 95 | 80 | 10% | 486 |
| Gain health education from health facilities. | 74.8 | 1:1 | 2.2 | 95 | 80 | 10% | 411 |
| Occupational status | 95.1 | 1:1 | 11.5 | 95 | 80 | 10% | 546 |

The final sample size for this study was 546, based on the largest estimate obtained from two calculations: a single population proportion formula and Epi Info™ 7
StatCal. The larger of the two, 546, was used.
Key informant interview: Key informant interviews were conducted with a TB focal person, an OPD focal person, and the health center director from each of the four

Key informant interview: Key informant interviews were conducted with a TB focal person, an OPD focal person, and the health center director from each of the four
locations. Each individual was purposively selected for the interview. Those interviewed were chosen because of their extensive experience and training in tuberculosis
infection prevention and control procedures. In total, 12 key informant interviews were conducted to gain insight from the evaluation questions.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t002)

Exit interview for acceptability dimension

The required sample size was calculated by a single population proportion formula. By taking
83.8% from the same study in southern Ethiopia \[17\].

s a m p l e,s i z e(n)=\ (z{}\_{2}^{a})\\underset{2}{\*}\\frac{p q}{d^{2}}N=209

Zα/2 = standard value of 1.96 at 95% confidence interval
d = margin of error = 5%, q = 1-p.

d = margin of error = 5%, q = 1-p.
However, by considering the 10% non-response rate and the total sample size of 230

However, by considering the 10% non-response rate and the total sample size of 230

The sample size for factors affecting caregiver satisfaction

The sample size for the factors associated with client satisfaction was calculated using Epi
InfoTM 7 StatCal by taking the assumption of power as 80%, the confidence interval as 95%,
and adding a 10% non-response rate from a study \[18\] (Table 2).

Data collection tools and sampling techniques

Resource inventory. To assess the availability of essential equipment and supplies, a checklist
was developed based on established guidelines for TB-IPC. This checklist included a list of
required items necessary for effective TB-IPC practices. Each facility was then evaluated during the inventory to determine the availability of these required resources. This comprehensive
assessment ensured that all facility resource inventories were thoroughly reviewed.
Document review. Program documents, including the IPC meeting agenda, focal person

Document review. Program documents, including the IPC meeting agenda, focal person
assignment letters, contact register, unit TB register, TB suspect register, AFB request forms,
TB follow-up cards, and TB screening tools, were reviewed retrospectively. A data extraction
checklist was used to collect information on how the health centers adhered to the established
guidelines.
Sampling techniques for observation. In this evaluation, the number of sessions observed

ers at each health center. According to the standardized USAID’s Evaluation Toolkit, 3–5
observations were selected randomly from two healthcare providers working in the facility. A
total of 60 observations were selected from 120 healthcare providers. The opportunistic sampling technique was used to select observation participants. Participants were involved in observation sessions based on the availability and willingness of individuals to participate in
the study \[15, 18\].
Sampling technique for exit interviews with clients. All four health centers (4 HCs) in the

Sampling technique for exit interviews with clients. All four health centers (4 HCs) in the
Tegede district were included in the study. The sample size of 546 was allocated proportionally
to each health facility based on its client flow from the same month in the previous year. Of the
allocated samples in each facility, the first study participant was selected randomly using the
lottery method, and to get study participants, systematic sampling techniques were used.
Finally, a study participant was interviewed at every third interval using a structured interviewer administered questionnaire. The total number of clients served at health facilities in the
district was 6606 in the previous year, from May 1 to June 30, 2022 \[8, 19\].
Sampling technique for Key informant interview. Purposeful sampling was conducted for

Sampling technique for Key informant interview. Purposeful sampling was conducted for
key informants’ TB focal of each facility; woreda TB officers and directors of each facility to
explore the views to know general information about TB-IPC practices by the key informant
interview guide \[3, 20\].

Data quality assurance

Five clinical nurses and two BSc nurse supervisors were recruited for interviewer-assisted data
collection. All data collectors and supervisors received one-day training on data collection
instruments, evaluation objectives, study participant ethics, and data collection procedures
before data collection on the same day.
For direct observation, two trained male BSc public health professionals who had three and

For direct observation, two trained male BSc public health professionals who had three and
four years of work experience and were trained on TB were recruited from the nearby woreda.
Key informant interviews, resource inventory, and document review data were collected by

Key informant interviews, resource inventory, and document review data were collected by
the principal investigator.

Data management and analysis

The questionnaires were checked daily for consistency and completeness by the principal
evaluator and supervisor after data collection. Any identified issues were discussed and
resolved immediately to ensure data integrity.
For handling missing or incomplete data, follow-up attempts were made to clarify or com-

For handling missing or incomplete data, follow-up attempts were made to clarify or complete responses whenever feasible. If data were missing for critical variables, those specific
cases were excluded from the analysis to maintain the reliability of the results. All instances of
missing or incomplete data were documented along with the rationale for the chosen handling
method to ensure transparency.
The data were then coded and entered into EpiData version 4.6 before being exported to

The data were then coded and entered into EpiData version 4.6 before being exported to
SPSS version 25 for further processing and analysis. Additional checks for missing data were
conducted in SPSS to confirm the completeness of the dataset prior to analysis.
Quantitative data were analyzed by exporting the coded data from EpiData Version 4.6 to

In the multivariate analysis, a p-value < 0.05 and a 95% confidence interval were used to
declare statistical associations. Additionally, the Hosmer-Lemeshow test was conducted to
assess the goodness of fit of the logistic regression model.

tables and graphs.
Variables that showed an association with the dependent variable with a p-value < 0.25 in
bivariate logistic regression were considered candidates for multiple logistic regression. This
higher p-value threshold was chosen to reduce the risk of Type II errors, allowing potentially
relevant variables to be included that might be overlooked if a more conservative threshold
(such as p < 0.05) were applied.

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Process evaluation of Tuberculosis infection control and prevention practice

Qualitative data were gathered, transcribed into the text format of the Amharic language and translated into the English language. It was analyzed component by component themati- cally, and the result was presented in narrative form to explain the quantitative results.

## Operational definition

## Availability refers to the physical access or presence of resources or infrastructure that meet a

minimum standard. These specifications are in terms of the elements of the implementation of the initiative, such as basic equipment, commodities, the health workforce (presence and train- ing), guidelines, and infrastructure. The availability of infrastructures for TB-IPC and the availability of supplies and drugs that are used for TB-IPC practices at health facilities. It was measured by an inventory checklist using 10 indicators. It was also given a weight of 40 percent. **Compliance is the adherence of healthcare providers to TB-IPC guidelines and is measured** by observation of provider-client interaction and document review using 10 indicators. It was given a weight of 30 percent. **Acceptability: The client’s satisfaction with the TB-IPC practices was measured by a five-** point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = agree, and 5 = strongly agree) using 11 items. The satisfaction level was dichotomized into satisfied and dissatisfied by using the demarcation formula: (total highest score + total lowest score 2) + total lowest. Based on this formula, scores above 45 were categorized as satisfied, and those below 45 were dissatisfied. It was measured with 11 indicators and given a weight of 30 percent. The acceptability (satisfaction) of clients with TB-IPC practices was the dependent variable. Socio-demographic factors (age, educational status, marital status, employment status, fam- ily size, income level, client’s residence, and availability of TB-IPC supplies) were independent variables of client acceptability of TB-IPC practice. The overall implementation of the TB-IPC practice was measured with 31 indicators using availability, compliance, and acceptability dimensions. The overall implementation level of TB-IPC practice was judged as poor (<54.9), fair (55–69.9), good (70–84.9), and very good (85–100).

## Matrix of analysis and judgment

The evaluation matrix is a tool for planning and conducting evaluations. Evaluation dimen- sions were weighted based on program relevance. The evaluation score was developed together with stakeholders during the evaluability assessment based on major things that are supposed to be available for the service. In each evaluation dimension, detailed indicators that are used to judge the performance of TB-IPC are listed and assigned weights, and the sum of the values of the indicators gives a total value for the specific dimension of evaluation. Indicators’ weight is the weight given by stake- holders before the evaluation of each selected indicator, and indicator scores are calculated _observed exp numb indicaertor weight_ using the formula (indicator score =). The commutative weight obtained _ecteerd∗numb_ from each dimension of evaluation is used to judge the program’s performance based on the evaluation parameters and criteria set earlier. The judgment matrix was determined based on the calculated indicator score; the investiga- tor was judged poor (<54.9), fair (55–69.9), good (70–84.9), and very good (85–100), respec- tively \[20, 21\]. The interpretation of the findings was based on the dimensions and a total of 31 indicators. Finally, conclusions were drawn about the overall process evaluation of TB-IPC practice, and

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514) February 14, 2025 8 / 19 each health facility received a customized report detailing the findings specific to their facility
and the recommended actions for improvement.
Ethical clearance was obtained from the Institute of Public Health ethical review committee

Ethical clearance was obtained from the Institute of Public Health ethical review committee
at the University of Gondar, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, with reference number
IPH/2513/2023, on April 11, 2023, and supporting letters were taken from the Tegede Woreda
Health Office and other relevant organizations in the study area. Written informed consent
was obtained from the respondents, and the confidentiality of participants’ information was
maintained by anonymous data. The participants were informed that participation in this
study is voluntary, and you can withdraw at any time without any consequences.

Evaluation dissemination plan

Once the data collection and analysis were completed, a report was prepared using a standardized structure. The final version of the evaluation results was conducted with stakeholders. A
draft report was shared and discussed initially with stakeholders in Tegede district health facilities and advisors for their comments. Incorporation of all relevant comments was done, and
after the approval of the thesis, hard copies of the evaluation report were disseminated to the
University of Gondar, Tegede district health office, zonal health department, and other stakeholders. Finally, the paper was sent for publication in a peer-reviewed journal.

Result

In this evaluation study, we conducted a resource inventory, reviewed documents from January 1, 2023, to March 30, 2023, observed 60 healthcare providers during client interactions,
completed 525 client exit interviews with a 96.2% response rate, and interviewed 12 key
informants.

Availability

A total of 105 staff are employed in four health centers; among these, 77 (73.3%) are healthcare
providers and 28 (26.7%) are administrative staff. From these, there are four general practitioners, eight health officers, fifteen midwives, thirty-three nurses, nine laboratory professionals, eight pharmacy professionals, and twenty-eight administrative staff in all four health
centers.
Among 77 healthcare providers, only 5 (6.5%) were trained in TB-IPC training programs.

Among 77 healthcare providers, only 5 (6.5%) were trained in TB-IPC training programs.
This was supported by a key informant interview.

This finding was similar to a key informant interview.

* * *

“Resources required for TB-IPC have not been fully availed. Resources that are not available
now are the triage room, reagents for AFB microscopy, weighing scale, and adult MUAC tape.
Due to the absence of reagents from EPSA and lack of commitment of HC heads to fulfill”

\[32-year-old male, public health TB focal person\]

Five (6.5%) of healthcare providers received training about TB. Concerning TB registration
and reporting formats, 3 (75%) of them had a TB suspect register and a TB follow-up card, but
all health centers had contact registers, unit TB registers, an AFB request form, a TB screening
tool, and a TB report format.

Summary of TB IPC program performance process on evaluation of
availability indicators

The overall proportion of resource availability to implement tuberculosis prevention and control practices at public health facilities was found to be 50.4%. It was rated as poor based on the
judgment criteria. This finding was supported by the key informant interviews.

“TB infection prevention and control practices are poorly implemented due to different reasons like lack of resources and low concern for TB-IPC practices; TB-IPC practices are poorly
implemented due to work overload and health professionals’ negligence on TB-IPC practice.”

\[30-year-old male, untrained BSc nurse professional\]

Compliance with national TB-IPC guidelines
Document review. The IPC meeting agenda, focal person assignment letter, contact regis-

A judgment summary of the availability dimension is presented in Table 3.

Table 3. Judgment summary of availability dimension of TB-IPC practices at public health facilities in Tegede district, Northwest Ethiopia, May 2023.

| S.No | Availability indicators | Expected in# | Observed in# | Weight(W) | Score(S) | Ach.in% $ \\frac{S}{W} \* 100$ | Judgment Parameter |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Proportion of trained health professionals for the TB-IPC training program | 77 | 5 | 6 | 0.4 | 6.5 | Poor |
| 2 | Proportion of health facilities with documented TB-IPC program plan. | 4 | 1 | 4 | 4 | 100 | Very good |
| 3 | Proportion of health facilities with the TB-IPC committee. | 4 | 2 | 4 | 2 | 50 | Poor |
| 4 | Proportion of health facilities with essential medications (Isoniazid and Rifampicin) available for TB-IPC during the study period. | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 100 | Very good |
| 5 | The proportion of health facilities with medical supplies (sputum cap, surgical mask,and N-95 mask) available for TB IPC during the study period. | 4 | 2 | 3 | 1.5 | 50 | Poor |
| 6 | The proportion of health facilities with ventilated waiting spaces. | 4 | 3 | 3 | 2.3 | 75 | Good |
| 7 | The proportion of health facilities with cough triage. | 4 | 0 | 4 | 0 | 0 | Poor |
| 8 | The proportion of health facilities with laboratory service for TB diagnosis(AFB). | 4 | 2 | 4 | 2 | 50 | Poor |
| 9 | The proportion of health facilities with a standalone TB clinic. | 4 | 2 | 4 | 2 | 50 | Poor |
| 10 | The proportion of health centers IPC meetings conducted based on the schedule | 4 | 2 | 4 | 2 | 50 | Poor |
| Overall implementation of the TB-IPC practices for availability dimension |  |  |  | 40 | 20.1 | 50.35 | Poor |

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t003) facility staff for TB. The other review finding revealed that none of the staff had developed TB
in the facility, and none of the health centers isolated patients with coughs early from other
patients.

“All household contacts with TB cases are not cooperative enough to come to the facility to be
screened for TB, but all those eligible will not get TB prophylaxis because some of the contacts
do not voluntarily take prophylaxis, and sometimes supply shortages also occur.”

\[29-year-old male, BSc nurse, TB focal person\]

In the assessment of TB infection control practices at health facilities, 45(75%) of health
workers asked about TB symptoms during client examinations, and 60 (100%) of OPD room
windows and doors were open. However, there were significant gaps: no health workers asked
about coughs, separated coughers in the waiting area, or had respirators available for staff in
high-risk areas (Table 4).

Observation of activities

Observations were conducted to assess TB-IPC practices among healthcare providers in the
facility. All healthcare providers opened the windows and doors of their rooms, ensuring
cross-ventilation in the waiting areas during the observation period. Additionally, 45 (75%) of
healthcare providers asked about TB symptoms during client examinations at the OPD. The
OPD rooms were equipped with functional mechanical ventilation, and the sputum smear
preparation laboratory areas were also cross-ventilated and adequately sized.
However, significant gaps were identified: no healthcare providers asked clients about

Table 4. Recording and reporting of TB-IPC activities in public health centers of Tegede district, Northwest Ethiopia, May 2023.

| S. No | Activities observed | Frequency | Percentage |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Does the health worker ask for coughs for clients entering the facility? | 0 | 0 |
| 2 | Does the health worker separate coughers in the waiting area? | 0 | 0 |
| 3 | Do the health workers ask for TB symptoms during examinations of clients at OPD? | 45 | 75.0 |
| 4 | Do the health workers wear masks during examinations of clients at OPD? | 15 | 25.0 |
| 5 | Do OPD room windows and doors open? | 60 | 100.0 |
| 6 | Does the OPD room have a functional mechanical ventilation system? | 45 | 75.0 |
| 7 | Does the waiting area have a functional mechanical ventilation system? | 15 | 25.0 |
| 8 | Is there a separate/designated sputum collection area? | 30 | 50.0 |
| 9 | Are respirators available for staff working in high-risk areas? | 0 | 0 |
| 10 | Is the laboratory sputum smear preparation area cross-ventilated? | 45 | 75.0 |
| 11 | Is the laboratory room size adequate? | 45 | 75.0 |
| 12 | Are outdoor waiting areas large enough to accommodate patients without crowding? | 0 | 0 |
| 13 | Is there cross-ventilation in OPDs, including TB clinics? | 30 | 50.0 |
| 14 | Is there cross-ventilation in the waiting area(s)? | 60 | 100 |
| 15 | Is there mechanical ventilation in OPDs, including TB clinics? | 45 | 75.0 |

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t004)

* * *

Table 5. Observation on compliance of public health facilities in Tedege district, Northwest Ethiopia, May 2023.

| S. No | Activities observed | Frequency | Percentage |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Does the health worker ask for coughs for clients entering the facility? | 0 | 0 |
| 2 | Does the health worker separate coughers in the waiting area? | 0 | 0 |
| 3 | Do the health workers ask for TB symptoms during the examination of clients at OPD? | 45 | 75.0 |
| 4 | Do the health workers wear masks during examinations of clients at OPD? | 15 | 25.0 |
| 5 | Do OPD room windows and doors open? | 60 | 100.0 |
| 6 | Does the OPD room have a functional mechanical ventilator? | 45 | 75.0 |
| 7 | Does the waiting area have a functional mechanical ventilator? | 15 | 25.0 |
| 8 | Is there a separate/designated sputum collection area? | 30 | 50.0 |
| 9 | Are respirators available for staff working in high-risk areas? | 0 | 0 |
| 10 | Is the laboratory sputum smear preparation area cross-ventilated? | 45 | 75.0 |
| 11 | Is the laboratory room size adequate? | 45 | 75.0 |
| 12 | Are outdoor waiting areas large enough to accommodate patients without crowding? | 0 | 0 |
| 13 | Is there cross-ventilation in OPDs, including TB clinics? | 30 | 50.0 |
| 14 | Is there cross-ventilation in the waiting area(s)? | 60 | 100 |
| 15 | Is there mechanical ventilation in OPDs, including TB clinics? | 45 | 75.0 |

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t005)

Summary of TB-IPC practices performance process on evaluation of
compliance indicators
The compliance dimension was measured using 10 indicators and had a weight value of 30%,

The compliance dimension was measured using 10 indicators and had a weight value of 30%,
scored 20.2%, and achieved 67.2%. It is set as fair according to the judgment parameter (see
Table 6).

Table 6. Judgment summary of compliance dimension of TB-IPC practices in Tegede district public health facilities, Northwest Ethiopia, May 2023.

| S.No | Compliance indicators | Expected in# | Observed in# | Weight(W) | Score(S) | Ach.in% $\\frac{S}{w}$\*100 | Judgment Parameter |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | The proportion of healthcare providers screened for TB in the last quarter. | 4 | 1 | 2 | 0.5 | 25.0 | Poor |
| 2 | The proportion of health facilities that have done facility TB IPC risk assessment using a facility TB risk assessment checklist. | 4 | 1 | 2 | 0.5 | 25.0 | Poor |
| 3 | The proportion of health facilities posted by IEC regarding cough etiquette in the waiting area, OPD,and lab units. | 4 | 3 | 3 | 2.3 | 75.0 | Good |
| 4 | The proportion of health facilities that had cross-ventilated OPDs | 4 | 3 | 4 | 3 | 75.0 | Good |
| 5 | The proportion of health facilities that had mechanical ventilation at OPD,TB clinic,lab unit,and waiting area. | 4 | 3 | 2 | 1.5 | 75.0 | Good |
| 6 | A proportion of healthcare providers used personal protective equipment at the time of data collection. | 60 | 15 | 4 | 1 | 25.0 | Poor |
| 7 | Proportion of HH contacts of bacteriologically confirmed TB patients that were investigated for TB | 41 | 38 | 4 | 3.7 | 92.8 | Very good |
| 8 | Proportion of HH contacts eligible for TPT who were prescribed treatment | 8 | 7 | 3 | 2.6 | 87.7 | Very good |
| 9 | Proportion of HH contacts eligible for TPT,who initiated TPT | 7 | 6 | 3 | 2.6 | 85.7 | Very good |
| 10 | Proportion of HH contacts who initiated TPT and completed TPT | 6 | 5 | 3 | 2.5 | 83.3 | Good |
| Overall implementation of the TB-IPC practices for compliance dimension |  |  |  | 30 | 20.2 | 67.2 | Fair |

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t006](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t006)

* * *

Acceptability

Socio-demographic characteristics of respondents. Among the total respondents, 155
(29.5%) were from Soroka Health Center, and 279 (53.1%) were males. The age of respondents
ranged between 18 and 68, and the mean age was 28.4. All of the respondents were Amharic
language speakers. Most identified as Orthodox Christian followers 497 (94.7%) were orthodox Christian religion followers, and 229 (43.6%) could read and write.
Regarding marital status, more than half (58.7%) of respondents married. Additionally, 334

Regarding marital status, more than half (58.7%) of respondents married. Additionally, 334
respondents (63.6%) earned an income between 2501 and 3500 Ethiopian birr (Table 7).
Fig 3 shows that 134 (25.5%) clients (95% CI = 21.96%, 29.4%) were satisfied with TB-IPC

Fig 3 shows that 134 (25.5%) clients (95% CI = 21.96%, 29.4%) were satisfied with TB-IPC
practices at Tegede district public health centers.

Table 7. Socio-demographic characteristics of respondents at public health centers in Tegede district, Northwest Ethiopia, May 2023.

| Variable | Categories | Frequency(N=525) | Percentage(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Facility | Kirakira HC | 111 | 21.1 |
| Ergoye HC | 126 | 24.0 |  |
| Soroka HC | 155 | 29.5 |  |
| Adet HC | 133 | 25.3 |  |
| Sex | Male | 279 | 53.1 |
| Female | 246 | 46.9 |  |
| Age | Less than 35 | 442 | 84.2 |
| Greater than 35 | 83 | 15.8 |  |
| Language | Amharic | 525 | 100.0 |
| Religion | Orthodox | 497 | 94.7 |
| Muslim | 28 | 5.3 |  |
| Educational status | Illiterate | 112 | 21.3 |
| Read and write | 229 | 43.6 |  |
| Primary education | 132 | 25.1 |  |
| Secondary education | 30 | 5.7 |  |
| College and above | 22 | 4.2 |  |
| Marital status | Single | 185 | 35.2 |
| Married | 308 | 58.7 |  |
| Widowed | 2 | .4 |  |
| Divorce/separate | 30 | 5.7 |  |
| Occupation | Government employee | 30 | 5.7 |
| Farmer | 202 | 38.5 |  |
| Merchant | 35 | 6.7 |  |
| House wife | 126 | 24.0 |  |
| Daily laborer | 50 | 9.5 |  |
| Unemployed | 82 | 15.6 |  |
| Family monthly income | 501-1000 | 11 | 2.1 |
| 1001-2500 | 84 | 16.0 |  |
| 2501-3500 | 334 | 63.6 |  |
| >3500 | 96 | 18.3 |  |
| Residence | Urban | 90 | 17.1 |
| Rural | 435 | 82.9 |  |

Clients overall satisfaction with TB-IPC practices at public health centers in Tegede district is presented in Fig 3: Clients overall satisfaction with TB-IPC practice at
public health centers in Tegede district, May 2023.

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Process evaluation of Tuberculosis infection control and prevention practice

**Fig 3. Clients overall satisfaction of clients with TB-IPC practices at public health centers of Tegede district, May 2023.**

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.g003)

## Factors affecting client satisfaction with the TB-IPC practices in public

## health facilities of Tegede District

Religion, education, occupation, residence, and family monthly income were significant in binary logistic regression with a 95% confidence interval, and they were candidate variables for multivariable analysis. In multivariable logistic regression analysis, occupation was statistically significant in pre- dicting TB-IPC acceptability (p < 0.05). Farmers had an odds ratio (AOR) of 22.5 for TB-IPC acceptability compared to govern- ment-employed clients (AOR = 22.498, 95% CI: 2.424–208.776), indicating that farmers were significantly more likely to accept TB-IPC practices. In contrast, merchants had lower odds of TB-IPC acceptability (AOR = 0.487, 95% CI: 0.243–0.977), suggesting they were less likely to accept these practices compared to government employees. Housewives showed a strong likelihood of accepting TB-IPC practices with an AOR of 15.3 (95% CI: 4.421–51.939), indicating they were significantly more inclined to accept these mea- sures compared to their counterparts. Conversely, unemployed clients had much lower odds of TB-IPC acceptability (AOR = 0.144, 95% CI: 0.031–0.655) when compared to government- employed clients, suggesting a significant barrier to acceptance among this group. These results indicate that occupation plays a crucial role in determining TB-IPC accept- ability, with notable variations across different occupational groups (presented in Table 8). The overall acceptability of the TB-IPC practices was rated poor, with a score of 43.4% (Table 9).

**Discussion**

The results of this evaluation revealed that the overall process of TB practice implementation in public health clinics in the Tegede district was poor (54.4%). Moreover, the availability of resources was poor (50.4%). According to the judgment criteria, healthcare providers’ compli- ance with national TB guideline recommendations and client acceptability were judged as fair (67.2%) and poor (43.4%), respectively. The implementation of TB-IPC practices requires immediate remediation.

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514) February 14, 2025 14 / 19

* * *

Table 8. Binary and multivariable logistic regression analysis result of clients’ satisfaction with the acceptability of TB program service delivery in Tegede District
public health facilities, Northwest Ethiopia, 2023.

| Variables | Satisfaction |  |  |  | p-value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Dis Satisfied | Satisfied | COR(95%CI) | AOR(95%CI) |  |
| Frequency(%) | Frequency(%) |  |  |  |  |
| Occupation |  |  |  |  |  |
| Government employee | 5(1.23) | 25(18.66) | 1 | 1 | 0.000 |
| Farmer | 180(46.04) | 22(16.42) | 13.636(4.643,40.047) | 22.498(2.424,208.776) | 0.006\*\* |
| Merchant | 4(1.02) | 31(23.13) | 0.333(0.172,0.644) | 0.487(0.243,0.977) | 0.043\*\* |
| House wife | 94(24.04) | 32(23.88) | 21.136(6.691,66.765) | 15.273(4.421,51.939) | 0.000\*\* |
| Daily laborer | 48(12.28) | 2(1.49) | 0.93(0.493,1.747) | 1.251(0.634,2.472) | 0.518 |
| Unemployed | 60(15.35) | 22(16.42%) | 0.114(0.025,0.507) | 0.144(0.031,0.655) | 0.012\*\* |
| Educational status |  |  |  |  |  |
| Illiterate | 108(27.62) | 4(2.99) | 1 | 1 | 0.000 |
| Can read and write | 189(48.34) | 4029.85) | 0.011(0.003,0.045) | 0.354(0.030,4.109) | 0.406 |
| Primary education | 82(20.97) | 50(37.31) | 0.062(0.022,0.179) | 1.675(0.176,15.905) | 0.653 |
| Secondary education | 7(1.79) | 23(17.16) | 0.179(0.062,0.516) | 3.676(0.389,34.765) | 0.256 |
| College and above | 5(1.28) | 17(12.69) | 0.966(0.261,3.573) | 5.455(0.600,49.592) | 0.132 |

COR; crude odds ratio; AOR; adjusted odds ratio; \* \* Variables associated with the satisfaction of clients of the TB IPC program in multi-logistic regression analysis.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t008](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t008)

Table 9. Judgment summary of the acceptability dimension of the TB-IPC practices in Tegede district public health facilities, Northwest Ethiopia, May 2023.

| S.No | Acceptability indicators | Expected in# | Observed in# | Weight(W) | Score(S) | Ach.in% $ \\frac{S}{W} \*100$ | Judgment Parameter |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | The proportion of clients who are satisfied with screening for TB in the examination room. | 525 | 347 | 3 | 2.0 | 66 | Fair |
| 2 | The proportion of clients satisfied with the separation of cougars in the facility. | 525 | 123 | 2.5 | 0.6 | 23.6 | Poor |
| 3 | The proportion of clients satisfied with the cleanliness of the facility. | 525 | 198 | 2.5 | 0.9 | 37.6 | Poor |
| 4 | The proportion of clients satisfied on the ventilation of OPD | 525 | 121 | 2.5 | 0.6 | 23.2 | Poor |
| 5 | Proportion of clients satisfied with openness of doors and windows during examination. | 525 | 363 | 3 | 2.1 | 69 | Fair |
| 6 | The proportion of clients satisfied with the waiting area has enough space and adequate ventilation for the clients. | 525 | 322 | 3 | 1.8 | 61.3 | Fair |
| 7 | Proportion of clients satisfied with the existence of a separate and a standalone TB clinic place. | 525 | 145 | 3 | 0.8 | 27.7 | Poor |
| 8 | Proportion of clients satisfied with waiting time for medical care | 525 | 370 | 3 | 2.2 | 71.7 | Good |
| 9 | The proportion of clients satisfied with education on cough etiquette during coughing and sneezing in the facility. | 525 | 292 | 2.5 | 1.4 | 55.6 | Fair |
| 10 | Proportion of clients satisfied with the improvement in condition after initiation of treatment. | 525 | 78 | 2 | 0.30 | 15.0 | Poor |
| 11 | Proportion of clients satisfied with screening for TB in the examination room. | 525 | 60 | 3 | 0.3 | 11.3 | Poor |
| Overall implementation of TB-IPC practices for acceptability dimension |  |  |  | 30% | 13.0 | 43.4 | Poor |

Overall implementation of TB- IPC practices for acceptability dimension

The implementation process of TB-IPC practices achieved a score of 54.4 out of 100, which is 54.4% of the total weight. Based on the preset judgment parameters, this
overall performance was deemed “needs urgent improvement" (Table 10).

* * *

Table 10. Summary of overall TB-IPC practice at public health facilities in Tegede district, Northwest Ethiopia, May 2023.

| S.No | Dimensions | Relative weight(W) | Score(S) | Achv.in % (S/W\*100) | Judgment parameter |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Availability | 40 | 20.1 | 50.4 | Poor |
| 2 | Compliance | 30 | 21.2 | 67.2 | Fair |
| 3 | Acceptability | 30 | 13.0 | 43.4 | Poor |
| The implementation process of TB-IPC practices |  | 100 | 54.4 | 54.4 | Poor = Needs urgent improvement |

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t010](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514.t010)

Availability dimension

The study found that only 50.4% of the necessary resources for TB-IPC were available. This is
consistent with findings from other regions in Ethiopia, where resource availability for
TB-IPC was similarly low. For instance, a study conducted in Southern Ethiopia reported an
implementation rate of only 34% for TB-IPC practices \[22\]. This poor availability is often
attributed to inadequate infrastructure and lack of financial resources, a challenge not unique
to Ethiopia but prevalent in many low-income countries \[23\].

Compliance with the TB national guideline

The compliance rate of 67.2% suggests that while some guidelines are being followed, significant non-compliance exists. This aligns with research in other Ethiopian healthcare settings,
where compliance with TB-IPC guidelines was found to be inconsistent \[24\]. Internationally,
studies have also shown varying compliance rates, often linked to staff training and resource
availability \[25\]. The lack of trained personnel specifically impacts compliance, as only 6.5% of

The compliance rate of 67.2% suggests that while some guidelines are being followed, significant non-compliance exists. This aligns with research in other Ethiopian healthcare settings,
where compliance with TB-IPC guidelines was found to be inconsistent \[24\]. Internationally,
studies have also shown varying compliance rates, often linked to staff training and resource
availability \[25\]. The lack of trained personnel specifically impacts compliance, as only 6.5% of

availability \[25\]. The lack of trained personnel specifically impacts compliance, as only 6.5% of
healthcare providers in this study had received TB-IPC training.

Acceptability of TB infection prevention and control

The study reported that only 25.5% of clients (95% CI = 22.0%, 29.44%) were satisfied with
TB-IPC practices. This low satisfaction rate echoes findings from other studies indicating that
patient perceptions of care quality are often linked to the availability of resources and adherence to safety protocols \[26\]. In a similar context, a study in Kenya noted that patient satisfaction improved significantly when health facilities adhered to IPC protocols \[27\].
According to the findings of this study, occupation was a statistically significant variable

According to the findings of this study, occupation was a statistically significant variable
influencing clients’ satisfaction with TB-IPC practices in public health centers in the Tegede
district (p < 0.05). The varying levels of TB-IPC acceptability among different occupations
underscore the importance of tailoring health interventions to specific groups. Farmers and
housewives, who typically have closer ties to community health initiatives and a better understanding of health risks, are more receptive to TB-IPC practices. In contrast, merchants and
unemployed individuals may benefit from targeted outreach and education to enhance their
awareness and acceptance of TB prevention measures.
Understanding these dynamics can inform public health strategies, ensuring that interven-

According to the findings of this study, occupation was a statistically significant variable
influencing clients’ satisfaction with TB-IPC practices in public health centers in the Tegede
district (p < 0.05). The varying levels of TB-IPC acceptability among different occupations
underscore the importance of tailoring health interventions to specific groups. Farmers and
housewives, who typically have closer ties to community health initiatives and a better understanding of health risks, are more receptive to TB-IPC practices. In contrast, merchants and
unemployed individuals may benefit from targeted outreach and education to enhance their
awareness and acceptance of TB prevention measures.
Understanding these dynamics can inform public health strategies, ensuring that interven-

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Process evaluation of Tuberculosis infection control and prevention practice

## Limitations of the evaluation

The satisfaction of clients might be overstated because the clients who are dissatisfied with the service may not come to the health center. The other limitation of this evaluation was the Hawthorne effect during observation of healthcare. Providers practice infection prevention to minimize this bias. Three client gaps were observed in between observations.

**Conclusion** These findings underscore the urgent need for strengthening TB-IPC practices within public health facilities in Tegede district. The suboptimal implementation rates highlight systemic issues, including inadequate training, insufficient resources, and low prioritization of TB-IPC by healthcare providers. Better to enhance training programs for healthcare workers to improve compliance with TB-IPC guidelines. Investment in human resources, including train- ing for all health professionals rather than just focal persons, and better to allocate resources, including the provision of essential equipment and medications could significantly improve practice outcomes. This study adds valuable data to the body of literature on TB-IPC in Ethio- pia and highlights specific areas for improvement.

## Supporting information

## S1 File.

(RAR)

**Acknowledgments** The authors acknowledged the University of Gondar, the College of Medicine and Health Sci- ences, and the Institute of Public Health for their support and facilitation of this study. The authors also acknowledged data collectors, supervisors, and card room runners for their con- tribution to this work.

## Author Contributions

## Conceptualization: Ashagere Mebratu.

## Data curation: Ashagere Mebratu.

## Formal analysis: Ashagere Mebratu.

## Investigation: Ashagere Mebratu.

## Methodology: Endalkachew Mesfin Gebeyehu.

## Software: Asebe Hagos.

## Supervision: Endalkachew Mesfin Gebeyehu, Asmamaw Atnafu, Asebe Hagos.

## Validation: Endalkachew Mesfin Gebeyehu, Asmamaw Atnafu, Asebe Hagos.

## Visualization: Asmamaw Atnafu.

## Writing – original draft: Ashagere Mebratu.

## Writing – review & editing: Endalkachew Mesfin Gebeyehu, Asmamaw Atnafu.

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514) February 14, 2025 17 / 19

* * *

01. Broekmans J, Migliori G, Rieder H, Lees J, Ruutu P, Loddenkemper R, et al. European framework for
    tuberculosis control and elimination in countries with a low incidence: recommendations of the World
    Health Organization (WHO), the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (IUATLD),
    and the Royal Netherlands Tuberculosis Association (KNCV) Working Group. European Respiratory
    Journal. 2002; 19(4):765–75.
02. World Health Organization. Global tuberculosis report 2023. World Health Organization; 2023.
03. World Health Organization. WHO guidelines on tuberculosis infection prevention and control: 2019
    update: World Health Organization, 2019.
04. Chakaya J, Petersen E, Nantanda R, Mungai BN, Migliori GB, Amanullah F, et al. The WHO Global
    Tuberculosis 2021 Report—not so good news and turning the tide back to end TB. International Journal
    of Infectious Diseases, 2022, 124:S26–S9.
05. Ethiopia Moh. Guidelines for Clinical and Programmatic Management of TB, TB/HIV, DR-TB, and Leprosy in Ethiopia 2021, p. 249.
06. Chakaya J., Khan M., Ntoumi F., Aklillu E., Fatima R., Mwaba P., et al. Global Tuberculosis Report
    2020: Reflections on the Global TB Burden, Treatment, and Prevention Efforts. International journal of
    infectious diseases, 2021; 113:S7–S12. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2021.02.107](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2021.02.107) PMID: 33716195
07. Wingfield T, Karmadwala F, MacPherson P, Millington KA, Walker NF, Cuevas LE, et al. Challenges
    and opportunities to end tuberculosis in the COVID-19 era. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine. 2021; 9
    (6):556–8. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00161-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00161-2) PMID: 33773121
08. Geberetsadik A, Woldeamanuel Y, Getahun M, Skovdal M. Barriers and facilitators to the implementation of tuberculosis infection control measures in South Ethiopia. PLoS One. 2019; 14(1).
09. Alemayehu M, Gelaye KA, Alemu K. Tuberculosis infection control measures and challenges in health
    centers in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. PLoS One. 2020; 15(12)
10. World Health Organization. WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact Measurement: report of a subgroup
    meeting on methods used by WHO to estimate TB disease burden, 11–12 May 2022, Geneva, Switzerland. World Health Organization; 2022 Oct 10.
11. Organization. WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis: module 1: prevention: infection prevention
    and control, 2022.
12. Temesgen C, Demissie M. Knowledge and practice of tuberculosis infection control among health professionals in Northwest Ethiopia, 2011. BMC Health Services Research, 2014; 14(1):593. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1186/s12913-014-0593-2 PMID: 25406598
13. Tiruneh M. G., Fenta E. T., Anagaw T. F., Bogale E. K., & Deli A. M. (2023). Tuberculosis infection control practice and associated factors among health care workers in Ethiopia: a systematic review and
    meta-analysis. PLOS ONE, 18(12). [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0295555](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0295555)
14. Labena F., Kassa Y., and Gambura E. Tuberculosis and public health care workers: infection prevention
    and control practices and associated factors among governmental health centers and hospitals in
    Wolaita Zone, Southern Ethiopia. Journal of multidisciplinary healthcare, 2021, Aug 10:21–22. https://
    doi.org/10.2147/JMDH.S321592 PMID: 34408426
15. Kigozi NG, Heunis JC, Engelbrecht MC, Janse van Rensburg AP, van Rensburg HD. Tuberculosis
    knowledge, attitudes, and practices of patients at primary health care facilities in a South African metropolitan area: research towards improved health education. BMC public health. 2017; 17(1):1–8.
16. Jensen PA, Lambert LA, Iademarco MF, and Ridzon R. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of
    Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care settings, 2005.
17. Eticha BM, Atomsa A, Tsehainesh B, and Berheto T. Patients’ perspectives on the quality of tuberculosis treatment services in South Ethiopia. American Journal of Nursing. 2014; 3(4):48–55.
18. Sorra J, Gray L, Streagle S, Famolaro T, Yount N, and Behm J. Hospital survey on patient safety culture: user’s guide. AHRQ Publication, 2016; 9.
19. Claassens MM, Van Schalkwyk C, Du Toit E, Roest E, Lombard CJ, Enarson DA, et al. Tuberculosis
    among healthcare workers and infection control measures at primary healthcare facilities in South
    Africa. PloS one. 2013; 8(10):e76272.
20. Abate TM, Salgado WB, Bayou NB. Evaluation of the Quality of Antenatal Care (ANC) Service at Higher
    2 Health Center in Jimma, South West Ethiopia. Open Access Library Journal, 2015, 2(04):1.
21. Gebremedhin T, Daka DW, Alemayehu YK, Yitbarek K, and Debie A. Process evaluation of the community-based newborn care program implementation in Geze Gofa district, south Ethiopia: a case study
    evaluation design. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth. 2019; 19(1):492. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-)
    019-2616-9 PMID: 31829193

References

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Process evaluation of Tuberculosis infection control and prevention practice

**22.** Assefa Y, et al. Implementation of tuberculosis infection control measures in Southern Ethiopia. _Ethiop J Health Sci. 2018; 28(3):355–364._
_**23.** World Health Organization. Global Tuberculosis Report 2021. Geneva: WHO; 2021._
_**24.** Tadesse A, et al. Assessment of tuberculosis infection prevention and control practices in public health facilities in Ethiopia. BMC Infect Dis. 2020; 20:293._
_**25.** Asefa A, et al. Compliance with tuberculosis infection control measures among healthcare workers in Ethiopia. Ethiop J Health Sci. 2021; 31(2):371–380._
_**26.** Abebe M, et al. Factors affecting patient satisfaction in public healthcare facilities in Ethiopia. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2020; 14:997–1007._
_**27.** Muliira J, et al. Patient satisfaction with tuberculosis care in Kenya: A cross-sectional study. BMC Health Serv Res_. 2019; 19:540.
**28.** O’Brien C, et al. Community engagement in tuberculosis prevention: Lessons from Ethiopia. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2020; 24(1):25–32.
**29.** Kebede A, et al. Tuberculosis infection control practices in Ethiopia: a systematic review. Trop Med Health. 2020; 48:5.
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314514) February 14, 2025 19 / 19