Surveillance of Airborne Adenovirus and Mycoplasma
pneumoniae in a Hospital Pediatric Department

. 2,3. 4,5
Gwo-Hwa Wan1\*, Chung-Guei Huang, Yhu-Chering Huang, Ju-Ping Huang1, Su-Li Yang2, Tzou-
4,5 2,3
Yien Lin, Kuo-Chien Tsao

1 Department of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, 2 Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, 3 Department of Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Research Center for Emerging Viral Infections, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan,
Taiwan, 4 Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, 5 College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan

Abstract

This investigation evaluated the distributions of airborne adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in public areas in the
pediatric department of Children’s Hospital in northern Taiwan. The airborne viral and bacterial concentrations were
evaluated twice a week for a year using filter sampling with an airflow rate of 12 liters per minute for eight hours in the
pediatric outpatient department and 24 hours in the pediatric emergency room. Real-time polymerase chain reaction assays
were conducted for analysis. Approximately 18% of the air samples from the pediatric emergency room were found to
contain adenovirus. Approximately forty-six percent of the air samples from the pediatric outpatient department contained
Mycoplasma pneumoniae DNA products. High detection rates of airborne adenovirus DNA were obtained in July and August
in the pediatric public areas. Airborne Mycoplasma pneumoniae was detected only in July in the pediatric emergency room
and the peak levels were found from August to January in the pediatric outpatient department. Airborne particles that
contained adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae were the most prevalent in the pediatric public areas. The potential
relationship between these airborne viral/bacterial particles and human infection should be examined further. Keywords:
adenovirus; Mycoplasma pneumoniae; filter sampling; real-time polymerase chain reaction; hospital; pediatric public areas.

Citation: Wan G-H, Huang C-G, Huang Y-C, Huang J-P, Yang S-L, et al. (2012) Surveillance of Airborne Adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in a Hospital
Pediatric Department. PLoS ONE 7(3): e33974. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033974

Editor: Benjamin J. Cowling, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Received January 15, 2012; Accepted February 24, 2012; Published March 21, 2012

Copyright: 2012 Wan et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

- E-mail: [ghwan@mail.cgu.edu.tw](mailto:ghwan@mail.cgu.edu.tw)

. These authors contributed equally to this work.

Introduction

Viral respiratory infection is the most common infectious
disease. The viruses, such as enterovirus, influenza virus, and
adenovirus, were most often isolated from the pediatric outpatients
\[1\]. Adenovirus causes acute respiratory tract infections in children
younger than 5 years old. Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a common
causative pathogen of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) in
children and young adults. In Taiwan, Mycoplasma pneumoniae was
reported to account for 20–30% of CAP cases \[2,3\]. Airborne
viruses are known to be associated with larger particles and
aggregate in nature \[4\]. Most aerosolized droplet nuclei are
between 0.58 and 5.42 mm in diameter \[5\]. One investigation
found 53% of detectable influenza virus particles in the respiratory
aerosol fraction (1–4 mm) \[6\].
Three primary factors - the virus concentration in the air, the

Materials and Methods

rus, adenovirus, and influenza A virus \[15\]. PCR analysis amplifies
nucleic acids exponentially, and is particularly sensitive to airborne
infectious agents, such as rhinovirus \[9,10\], RSV \[14\], enterovirus,
adenovirus, influenza A virus \[15\], SARS coronavirus \[11–13\],
and measles virus \[16\]. No standard protocol had been established
for collecting and detecting specific viral particles in the air.
Until recently, few studies have examined the long-term including the pediatric emergency room and the pediatric
outpatient department. In the sampling periods, the air in the
pediatric public areas was conditioned without heating. No local
source of industrial air pollution was close to the hospital. The
study protocol was approved by the institutional review board of
the hospital.

Air Sampling
Air samplers were placed in the center of the pediatric outpatient
department and the pediatric emergency room for 8 hours (from 9
am to 5 pm) and 24 hours, respectively, randomly selected twice
weekly (Monday to Saturday) for a year (February 2009 to January
2010). Sampling was performed 1.2–1.5 m above the floor, in the
human breathing zone. The indoor air was filtered through a
closed-face, three-piece disposable plastic cassette with a 0.2 mm
polytetrafluoroethylene filter at an airflow rate of 12 L/min (LPM)
for bioaerosol sampling. A total of 186 filter samples (93 samples
from the pediatric outpatient department and 93 samples from the
pediatric emergency room) were collected and the filters were
immediately stored at 270uC until they were analyzed.
The air quality indices (air temperature, relative humidity (RH),

Air Sampling
Air samplers were placed in the center of the pediatric outpatient

10^{6}

\ \\mathrm\ (O\_{2})

The air quality indices (air temperature, relative humidity (RH),
carbon dioxide (CO2) and suspended particular matter) in the
pediatric public areas of the hospital were evaluated during the
study period. The indoor temperature, RH and CO2 concentration were determined using a digital psychrometer (TSI incorporated 500 Cardigan Road, Shoreview, MN 55126, USA). The
portable DUSTcheck monitor (Grimm, model 1.108, Germany)
was used to measure the mass concentrations of particulate
matters.

-70^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

Preparation of filter sample extracts and DNA extraction
One thousand and five hundred microliters aliquots of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) were pipetted into 60 mm
diameter petri dishes that each contained a filter, and these petri
dishes were then placed on an orbital tabletop shaker at a speed of
150 rpm for 60 minutes at room temperature. All samples were
stored at 280uC until DNAs were extracted.
The DNA was extracted using the Qiagen DNA mini kit
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s

The DNA was extracted using the Qiagen DNA mini kit
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s
directions. Briefly, 500 mL of the sample was extracted and the
nucleic acid was eluted in a final volume of 30 mL. All eluted
samples were stored at 280uC until analysis. In the negative
controls, sterile distilled water was added in place of the samples.
Real-time quantitative PCR assay

Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the filter samples were quantitatively
measured as previously described \[17\]. Concentrations of
6
calibration standards ranged from 10 to 10 copies/mL for
4
adenovirus and 10 to 10 copies/mL for Mycoplasma pneumoniae.
For the tested adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae, the known
amounts of plasmid cDNA yielded cycle threshold (Ct) values
ranging between 19.46 and 36.58 cycles. The correlation
coefficient (r) values of the calibration curves were 0.99 for
adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae.

30~\\upmu.

500~\\upmu L

Real-time quantitative PCR assay
Table 1 presented the sequences of the primers and probes for
adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. The adenovirus and

\_\\\mathrm{{a}t}80^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

{mathrm\\textit{a t}}-80^{\\circ}\\mathbf{C}

10^{4}

M M c o p l a

Statistical analysis
SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Science) version 13.0 (SPSS

Statistical analysis
SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Science) version 13.0 (SPSS
Inc., Chicago, USA) was used for the statistical analyses. The level
of significance was set to 0.05. The figures were constructed using
GraphPad Prism 5.0 software. A two-sample t test was used to
assess the differences of detection rates between adenovirus and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the pediatric emergency room and
pediatric outpatient department, respectively.

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

During the study period, the air temperatures and relative
humidity were 16.1–26.6uC and 42.5–77.7%, respectively, in the
pediatric emergency room, and 13.7–24.8uC and 50.4–84.7% in
the pediatric outpatient department. The CO2 concentrations
were 404–704 ppm in the pediatric emergency room and 372–
2,575 ppm in the pediatric outpatient department. The mean
concentrations of 10 mm (PM10) and 1 mm (PM1) particles were
8.9 mg/m3 and 17.0 mg/m3, respectively, in the pediatric emergency room, and approximately 105 mg/m3 and 167 mg/m3,
respectively, in the pediatric outpatient department.
Filter samples without airflow passage were selected as negative

16.{\\dot{1}}{\\dot{-}}{\\dot{2}}{.}6^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

\_{13.7{-}24.8^{\\circ}C}

\ \\mathrm(\\mathrm{P M}\_{\\mathrm{l}})

\\mathrm{f}\\leq{\ }mathrm00\ up\ \ {p\\mathrm{P}}\ \\mathrm{}}\ \ {\ \ \ \ \ \ q\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \

167;\\upmu\\mathrm{g/m}^{3}

105\ \\upmu\\mathrm{g/m}^{3}

8.9,\\up{\ up\ {mathfrakmu}mathrm{g{}m}}^{3}

17.0,\\up\ {mathfrak p g}/{\\mathfrak{m}}^{3},

Filter samples without airflow passage were selected as negative
controls. The adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae were not
found in the blank filters. Also, PCR positive rates of the positive
controls containing adenovirus or Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the
sampling filters are 100%. The monthly detection rate (18.3%) of
the adenovirus in the air samples of the pediatric emergency room
of the medical center was clearly higher than that of Mycoplasma
pneumoniae (0.9% of the air samples) (p = 0.009) (Fig. 1). Around
45.8% of the air samples from the pediatric outpatient department
contained Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Other pathogen, adenovirus
(9.8% of the air samples), was also found in the pediatric
outpatient department.
In this study, airborne particles that contained adenovirus were

outpatient department.
In this study, airborne particles that contained adenovirus were
detected in the pediatric emergency room throughout the year
except in March to May, and October (Fig. 2A). Detection rates of
airborne adenovirus DNA products in the filter samples in the

Table 1. The sequences of primers and probes of adenovirus and Mycoplasma Pneumoniae.

| Oligo Names | Sequences(5'→3') | Genes | Reference |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Adenovirus |  | Hex | - |
| Ad-s | GCCCCAGTGGGCTTACATGCACATC |  |  |
| Ad-as | ATTGAAGTAGGTGTCTGTGGCGCGGG |  |  |
| Ad-probe | FAM-AACTGCACCAGACCCGGGCTCAGGTACTCC-TAMRA |  |  |
| Mycoplasma pneumoniae |  | P1 | 17 |
| MP-TM1 | CCAACCAAACAACAACGTTCA |  |  |
| MP-TM2 | ACCTTGACTGGAGGCCGTTA |  |  |
| MP-probe | VIC-ATCCGAATAACGGTGACTT-MGB |  |  |

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033974.t001

* * *

A

B

Figure 1. Airborne adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the pediatric public areas. The monthly positive rates (mean6se) of
airborne particles containing adenovirus (ADV) and Mycoplasma pneumoniae (MP) in the pediatric emergency room (ER) (A) and pediatric outpatient
department (OPD) (B). \*\*: p,0.01.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033974.g001

pediatric emergency room were high in July (33.3%) and August
(66.7%). The airborne Mycoplasma pneumoniae DNA products were
detected in the pediatric emergency room only in July (11.1% of
the air samples). The airborne particles that contained adenovirus
concentrations ranged between ,10 copies/m3 and 104 copies/
m3 in the pediatric emergency room. The median concentration of
airborne adenovirus DNA was highest in December. Only one air
sample in the pediatric emergency room was positive for
Mycoplasma pneumoniae DNA product (645 copies/m3).
The detection rate of adenovirus-containing particles in the air

This study is the first to examine the long-term variation of the
distribution of airborne adenoviral particles and Mycoplasma
pneumoniae in the pediatric emergency room and pediatric
outpatient department of the Children’s Hospital in Taiwan.
The detection rate of airborne adenovirus DNA products in the
pediatric emergency room clearly exceeded those of Mycoplasma
pneumoniae DNA products. Airborne Mycoplasma pneumoniae DNA
products were detected in around 46% of samples from the
pediatric outpatient department of the hospital. The distribution of
microbial species in the pediatric public areas warrants further
attention from the department of environmental safety and health
to reduce the risk of microbial exposure in humans. The possibility

Discussion

48.4\ \\mathrm{c o p i e s}/\\mathrm{m}^{3}

9.9\\times{00}^{4};\\mathrm{c o p i e s}/{mathrm{{m}}^{3}}

of adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae that transmitted by the
airborne route also warrants further investigation.
In this study, the detection rates of airborne adenovirus DNA

airborne route also warrants further investigation.
In this study, the detection rates of airborne adenovirus DNA
products peaked in summer in the pediatric outpatient department
and the pediatric emergency room, respectively. Furthermore,
airborne Mycoplasma pneumoniae were frequently detected in the
pediatric outpatient department and the detection rates were
highest in autumn and winter seasons. This results suggest that the
ventilation rate in pediatric public areas (including the emergency
room and outpatient department) of hospitals should be increased
during the peak seasons of adenovirus and Mycoplasma pneumoniae
contamination to reduce the airborne bioaerosol levels. The
limitation of this study was lack of environmental characteristics
measurement along with airborne adenovirus and Mycoplasma
pneumoniae sampling. Further study will enable the relationship
between indoor environmental characteristics (including temperature, relative humidity and CO2 concentration) and the airborne
adenovirus/Mycoplasma pneumoniae to be elucidated.
The air sampling time in the pediatric outpatient department

adenovirus/Mycoplasma pneumoniae to be elucidated.
The air sampling time in the pediatric outpatient department
was shorter than that in the pediatric emergency room. The main
reason was that the pediatric outpatient department of the hospital
was close at nighttime. The monthly detection rate of airborne
adenovirus DNA products in the filter samples in the pediatric
outpatient department was lower than that in the pediatric
emergency room, but the measured viral concentrations in March,
May, June, and July in the pediatric outpatient department
considerably exceeded those measured in the pediatric emergency
room. Additionally, Mycoplasma pneumoniae exhibited not only a
higher detection rate but also higher concentrations in the
pediatric outpatient department than in the pediatric emergency
room. The possible cause may be the indoor unfair ventilation and
more patients with Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection in the pediatric
outpatient department. The results demonstrate that the mean
CO2 concentration in the pediatric outpatient department
exceeded that in the pediatric emergency room. Therefore, the
ventilation system should be adjusted periodically and the air
change rate should be increased during peak seasons with high
viral concentrations in the pediatric public areas. Also, highefficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters should perhaps be installed
in the ventilation systems in the pediatric public areas of hospitals

* * *

A

B

Figure 2. Monthly distributions of airborne ADV and MP in the pediatric ER (A) and OPD (B). Monthly distributions of the detection rates
of airborne ADV and MP in the filter samples and the median concentration distributions of ADV and MP in the air of the pediatric public areas.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033974.g002

References

A previous investigation found that the number of patients with
influenza was closely correlated with the number of air samples that
contained influenza A RNA (r = 0.77) \[18\]. Tseng et al. study
indicated that the influenza A virus concentrations in the air were
significantly correlated with the number of patients with low
respiratory tract infections (r = 0.43, p = 0.02), but no correlation
occurred between the viral concentrations and the number of patients
with upper respiratory tract infections (r = 0.33, p = 0.06) \[15\]. During
the study period, there was not outbreak occurrence of adenovirus and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections in the hospital. There were a great
number of patients and visitors in the hospital, and not all of patients
with respiratory tract infection were tested for adenovirus or
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections, so it would be underestimated the
number of patients with adenovirus or Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection
in the pediatric public areas. The relationship between the number of
infected patients and the number of air samples with detected certain
pathogens warrants further investigation.

(\\mathrm{r}!=!0.33,p!=!0.06)

(\\mathrm{r}!=!0.43,

Indoor air quality is important to prevent infection and thereby
protect patients and health care workers in hospitals. The quality
of indoor air depends on heating ventilation and air conditioning
(HVAC) systems, the number of persons, human activity and other
factors (i.e., the outdoor air quality) \[19,20\]. Until recently, no
standard method had been established for detecting specific viral
aerosol particles. Tolerable levels of airborne viruses in hospitals
have not yet been established. Airborne particle concentration has
been suggested to be an indicator of microbial contamination \[21\].
In this study, PM10 and PM1 levels were higher in the pediatric
outpatient department than in the pediatric emergency room.
Hence, further investigations must be performed to characterize
the relationship between particulate matter levels, such as PM10
and PM1, and the concentrations of airborne viruses and bacteria.

\\mathrm{P M}\_{10}

Conceived and designed the experiments: G-HW C-GH. Performed the
experiments: C-GH J-PH Y-CH T-YL. Analyzed the data: J-PH S-LY K-
CT. Wrote the paper: G-HW.

\\mathrm{{p M}\_{10}}

Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: G-HW C-GH. Performed the

\\mathrm{P M}\_{\\mathrm{l}}

* * *

3. Chang YT, Yang YH, Chiang BL (2006) The significance of a rapid cold
   hemagglutination test for detecting mycoplasma infections in children with
   asthma exacerbation. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 39: 28–32.
4. Aller JY, Kuznetsova MR, Jahns CJ, Kemp PF (2005) The sea surface

asthma exacerbation. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 39: 28–32.
4\. Aller JY, Kuznetsova MR, Jahns CJ, Kemp PF (2005) The sea surface
microlayer as a source of viral and bacterial enrichment in marine aerosols.
J Aerosol Sci 36: 801–812.
5\. Yang S, Lee GW, Chen CM, Wu CC, Yu KP (2007) The size and concentration

12. Booth TF, Kournikakis B, Bastien N, Ho J, et al. (2005) Detection of airborne
    severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus and environmental
    contamination in SARS outbreak units. J Infect Dis 191: 1472–1477.

13. Tsai YH, Wan GH, Wu YK, Tsao KC (2006) Airborne SARS Coronavirus
    concentrations in a negative pressure isolation room containing a mechanically
    ventilated patient with SARS. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 27: 523–525.

14. Aintablian N, Walpita P, Sawyer MH (1998) Detection of Bordetella pertussis
    and respiratory syncytial virus in air samples from hospital rooms. Infect Control
    Hosp Epidemiol 19: 918–923.

15. Tseng CC, Chang LY, Li CS (2010) Detection of airborne viruses in a pediatrics
    department measured using real-time qPCR coupled to an air-sampling filter
    method. J Environ Health 73: 22–28.

16. Pyankov OV, Agranovski IE, Pyankova O, Mokhonova E, Mokhonov V, et al.
    (2007) Using a bioaerosol personal sampler in combination with real-time PCR
    analysis for rapid detection of airborne viruses. Environ Microbiol 9: 992–1000.

17. Weltia M, Jatona K, Altweggb M, Sahlia R, Wengera A, et al. (2003)
    Development of a multiplex real-time quantitative PCR assay to detect Chlamydia
    pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in respiratory tract
    secretions. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 45: 85–95.

18. Lindsley WG, Blachere FM, Davis KA, Pearce TA, Fisher MA, et al. (2010)
    Distribution of airborne influenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus in an
    urgent care medical clinic. Clin Infect Dis 50(5): 693–698.

19. Spengler JD, Saxton K (1983) Indoor air pollution: a public health perspective.
    Science 221: 9–17.

20. Samet JM, Marbury MC, Spengler JD (1987) Health effects and sources of
    indoor air pollution. Am Rev Respir Dis 136: 1486–1508.

21. Dharan S, Pittet D (2002) Environmental controls in operating theatres. J Hosp
    Infect 51: 79–84.

22. Yang S, Lee GW, Chen CM, Wu CC, Yu KP (2007) The size and concentration
    of droplets generated by coughing in human subjects. J Aerosol Med 20:
    484–494.

23. Blachere FM, Lindsley WG, Pearce TA, Anderson SE, Fisher M, et al. (2009)


Clin Infect Dis 48: 438–440.
7\. Hermann JR, Hoff SJ, Yoon KJ, Burkhardt AC, Evans RB, et al. (2006)
Optimization of a sampling system for recovery and detection of airborne
porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus and swine influenza virus.
Appl Environ Microbiol 72: 4811–4818.
8\. Hogan CJ, Kettleson EM, Lee MH, Ramaswami B, Angenent LT, et al. (2005)

8. Hogan CJ, Kettleson EM, Lee MH, Ramaswami B, Angenent LT, et al. (2005)
   Sampling methodologies and dosage assessment techniques for submicrometre
   and ultrafine virus aerosol particles. J Appl Microbiol 99: 1422–1434.

9. Myatt TA, Johnston SL, Rudnick S, Milton DK (2003) Airborne rhinovirus

10. Myatt TA, Johnston SL, Rudnick S, Milton DK (2003) Airborne rhinovirus
   detection and effect of ultraviolet irradiation on detection by a semi-nested RT-
   PCR assay. BMC Public Health 3: 5.

11. Myatt TA, Johnston SL, Zuo Z, Wand M, Kebadze T, et al. (2004) Detection of

12. Myatt TA, Johnston SL, Zuo Z, Wand M, Kebadze T, et al. (2004) Detection of
   airborne rhinovirus and its relation to outdoor air supply in office environments.
   Am J Respir Crit Care Med 169: 1187–1190.

13. Wan GH, Tsai YH, Wu YK, Tsao KC (2004) A large-volume nebulizer would

14. Wan GH, Tsai YH, Wu YK, Tsao KC (2004) A large-volume nebulizer would
   not be an infectious source for severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). Infect
   Control Hosp Epidemiol 25: 1113–1115.