Perspective
Fighting COVID-19: Integrated Micro- and

Fighting COVID-19: Integrated Micro- and
Nanosystems for Viral Infection Diagnostics

1 1 1 1,2,\*
Zhen Qin, Ran Peng, Ilina Kolker Baravik, and Xinyu Liu

The pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) highlights
the importance of rapid and sensitive diagnostics of viral infection
that enables the efficient tracing of cases and the implementation
of public health measures for disease containment. The immediate
actions from both academia and industry have led to the development of many COVID-19 diagnostic systems that have secured
fast-track regulatory approvals and have been serving our healthcare frontlines since the early stage of the pandemic. On diagnostic
technologies, many of these clinically validated systems have significantly benefited from the recent advances in micro- and nanotechnologies in terms of platform design, analytical method, and system
integration and miniaturization. The continued development of new
diagnostic platforms integrating micro- and nanocomponents will
address some of the shortcomings we have witnessed in the existing
COVID-19 diagnostic systems. This Perspective reviews the previous and ongoing research efforts on developing integrated microand nanosystems for nucleic acid-based virus detection, and highlights promising technologies that could provide better solutions
for the diagnosis of COVID-19 and other viral infectious diseases.
With the summary and outlook of this rapidly evolving research
field, we hope to inspire more research and development activities
to better prepare our society for future public health crises.

INTRODUCTION

The current pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has affected 217
countries and territories around the world1 and has significantly affected everyone’s
life as well as the global economy. As of June 5, 2020, 6.52 million people have been
2
confirmed infected and 387,000 people have died because of COVID-19. Caused
by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the
COVID-19 spreads rapidly and causes deadly symptoms (10-fold more deadly
3
than the 2009 swine influenza). The reported infection cases share similar initial
symptoms such as fever, cough, myalgia, or fatigue (Figure 1A), and many cases
further developed pneumonia and severe respiratory diseases such as acute respira-
4
tory distress syndrome. Considering the disease’s high transmissibility (R0:1.4–
5,6
5.5), the early testing of SARS-CoV-2 infection is essential; it is also highly critical
to trace cases and implement necessary measures against the spread of COVID-19.
Patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 express nonspecific symptoms similar to those
6
of other types of respiratory infections; therefore, suspected cases must be
screened through specific diagnostic methods.

Progress and Potential

Progress and Potential
The development of integrated
molecular diagnostic platforms
based on state-of-the-art microand nanotechnologies has greatly
improved both laboratory-based
and point-of-care testing of the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19). Enabled by recent advances
in molecular biology, analytical
chemistry, microfluidics,
nanotechnology, and biomedical
instrumentation, these integrated
micro- and nanosystems hold
significant potential to provide
better solutions for diagnosis of
COVID-19 and other viral
infectious diseases in epidemic
and pandemic situations. By
summarizing the state-of-the-art
molecular diagnostic systems and
highlighting the promising
technologies that need further
development, this Perspective
intends to spark further research
and development activities in this
critical research area.

* * *

COVID-19 and sample collection

B

Nucleic acid test (Lab-based)

C

E

Nucleic acid amplification

G

Figure 1. The Diagnosis of COVID-19 with Laboratory-Based and POC Tests
(A) The symptoms of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

(A) The symptoms of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
(B) Schematic illustration of SARS-CoV-2 and the antibody concentrations within an infected human body changing with time.

79
(B) Schematic illustration of SARS-CoV-2 and the antibody concentrations within an infected human body changing with time.
(C) Nasopharyngeal sample collection from a patient.

of the SARS-CoV-2 sequence and could, in principle, provide high sensitivity and specificity. Thus, NA-based detection of SARS-CoV-2 has become the gold standard for
10–12
COVID-19 diagnostics. The CT chest scan has also been used for COVID-19 diagnosis in China. It provides relatively high sensitivity (86%–98%) but low specificity (~25%)
because the symptomatic features of the CT scan are similar to those of other types of
12
viral pneumonia. Serological tests detect antibodies generated by our immune system
13
against SARS-CoV-2, which can confirm infection or previous exposure to the virus.
However, after SARS-CoV-2 infection, it usually takes a week or two for the body to
produce a detectable amount of antibodies (Figure 1B). Thus, serological testing is
not effective for early diagnosis of COVID-19 but more suitable for assessing infected
populations. Until now, the serological testing is only recommended by the World
14
Health Organization for research purposes but not for clinical diagnostics.

(E) Virus RNA extraction.
(F) PCR-based RNA amplification in a thermal cycler.

(C) Nasopharyngeal sample collection from a patient.
(D) The collected specimen stored in a sample tube.

(D) The collected specimen stored in a sample tube.
(E) Virus RNA extraction.

(G) Schematic illustration of the fluorescent signal readout during the amplification process.
(H) The testing process with lab-in/on-an-X (LionX) systems for diagnosis of COVID-19.

(H) The testing process with lab-in/on-an-X (LionX) systems for diagnosis of COVID-19.

\*Correspondence: [xyliu@mie.utoronto.ca](mailto:xyliu@mie.utoronto.ca)

1Department of Mechanical and Industrial
Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
M5S 3G8, Canada
2Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical

[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2020.06.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2020.06.015)

* * *

For NA-based testing (Figures 1C–1G), the rapid genome sequencing of SARS-CoV-2
strains has led to the development of many RT-PCR kits with 11 approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and more than 100 products under registra-
10
tion. The commercial RT-PCR kits for COVID-19 testing are summarized in the recent
4,13 15
literature and online resources. There has been a growing list of commercial
COVID-19 diagnostic systems regulatorily approved by different countries for both lab-
16,17
oratory-based and point-of-care (POC) testing. Table S1 lists the commercial
COVID-19 diagnostic products approved by the US FDA (through Emergency Use
17 16
Authorization) and Health Canada. The commercial diagnostic systems greatly
benefit practices of first responders, aid in immediate risk evaluation of on-site events,
18,19
and thus play a crucial role in fighting the COVID-19 pandemic.

In public health crises such as the current pandemic, an ideal diagnostic platform is
expected to be fully integrated, autonomous, and high-throughput, and to be able
20,21
to provide accurate results in short turnaround time (TAT). For POC testing, the
diagnostic platform may also need to be portable, easy to operate, and resource/
infrastructure independent. The commercial diagnostic systems (Table S1) possess
many of the aforementioned features such as high throughput, high integration
22
level, and short TAT; however, there are still shortcomings of these commercial
products that prevent them from fully meeting the diagnostic needs during the
pandemic, such as the involvement of manual operations, insufficient sensitivity,
and the dependence on critical consumable supplies (e.g., nasal swabs and RNA
23,24
extraction columns). In the past two decades, intensive research efforts have
been spent on developing integrated micro- and nanosystems for disease diagnos-
25,26
tics. Leveraging interdisciplinary expertise in molecular biology, analytical
chemistry, microfluidics, nanotechnology, and biomedical instrumentation, significant advances have been made to develop new types of diagnostic platforms with
many unique merits that promise better solutions for COVID-19 diagnostics.

SAMPLE COLLECTION AND NUCLEIC ACID EXTRACTION

This Perspective aims to summarize the state of the art of integrated micro- and
nanosystems for NA-based virus detection, and highlight promising diagnostic platforms and technologies that could significantly facilitate the diagnostic practices
during and after the current pandemic, and, more importantly, better prepare our
healthcare systems for future crises. There have been several timely reviews and
editorial articles recently published on diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccine devel-
4,13,20,27–29
opment of COVID-19. This Perspective focuses on the state-of-the-art
platform technologies integrating micro- and nanocomponents for the diagnosis
of viral infections such as COVID-19. Targeting a high level of hardware integration
and automation, many diagnostic systems have been developed and conceptually
presented in forms such as ‘‘lab-on-a-chip,’’ ‘‘lab-in-a-tube,’’ and ‘‘lab-in-a-box’’.
We focus our review on these ‘‘lab-in/on-an-X00 or ‘‘LionX’’ platforms and discuss
all technical components (e.g., sample preprocessing and NA extraction, amplification, and signal detection) required to realize NA testing on these integrated systems (Figure 1H). Given the current situation and long-term projection of the
COVID-19 pandemic, we hope that this Perspective will provide useful information
on the integrated micro- and nanosystems applicable to virus detection, and further
accelerate the translation of these LionX diagnostic platforms into practical frontline
tools to tackle COVID-19 and other viral infectious diseases.

The SARS-CoV-2 has a large positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome
30,31
(26–35kb) and contains four structural proteins including the spike protein (S),

* * *

Perspective

membrane protein (M), envelope protein (E), and nucleocapsid protein (N). The
spike protein is critical for binding to host cell receptors to facilitate viral entry
into the host cell, while proteins M, E, and N are structural proteins that are necessary
31,32
for general coronavirus functions. The NA-based testing of SARS-CoV-2 includes four major steps: sample collection, RNA extraction, amplification, and signal
detection. The integrity and quantity of viral RNA extracted from patient samples are
33
essential for downstream NA amplification and detection. Quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR) is presently the gold standard laboratory test for routine confirmation
15,22,23,34
of suspected acute respiratory infection cases. For COVID-19 sample
collection, the SARS-CoV-2 can be isolated from respiratory samples such as
18
sputum, nasal, and throat swabs/washes, with typical viral load ranging from 641
11 4
to 1.34 3 10 copies/mL, with a median of 7.99 3 10 copies/mL in throat samples,
5 5 34,35
7.52 3 10 copies/mL in sputum, and 1.69 3 10 copies/mL in nasal samples.
The collected specimen is then purified via a multi-step sample preparation process
including virus lysis, inhibition of ribonuclease enzymes, and NA binding, washing,
and elution to ensure the RNA of interest is free of contaminants such as proteins,
36,37
undesired NAs, and other cellular components.

7.99\\times10^{4}

1.34\\times10^{11}

1.69\\times10^{5}

7.52\\times10^{5}

For NA extraction, many chemical and mechanical methods have been devel-
38,39
oped. Phenol-chloroform extraction is a low-cost laboratory technique
40
frequently used for NA extraction. However, this method is based on delicate
and tedious steps and is associated with hazardous waste by-products that can
directly affect the PCR results and lead to a decrease in assay sensitivity. The clinical
demand for efficient, rapid, and simpler NA purification techniques has led to the
development of many solid-phase extraction methods such as silica columns and
41–52
aluminum oxide membrane-based platforms. The majority of these NA extractionmethodsrelyonhighcentrifugalforcewithmultipleliquidhandlingandcentrifugation steps that are required for elution of bound NAs from a column/membrane
support (Figure 2A). Another NA extraction method based on functionalized silicaparamagnetic microbeads has been widely used in many LionX systems for NA
testing. These magnetic microbeads, which are commercially available, can be
used to covalently bind and isolate NAs through magnetic control (Figure 2B).
53–56
The magnetic microbead method eliminates the need for column separation
and repeated centrifugation. Although this method still requires additional incubation and multiple washing steps, these manipulation steps can be readily streamlined on a LionX system (see details in the section Integrated Lab-in/on-an-X
57,58
Systems).

Recent literature also reported different types of paper-/membrane-based extraction methods that do not require complex device fabrication and the use of laboratory equipment for the centrifugation, separation, and elution steps (Figure 2C). For
example, filtration-based isolation of NAs has been developed by using cellulose
59–61
paper discs (Fusion 5 filters) and the commercial Whatman Flinders Technology
62–64
Associates (FTA) cards. In systems involving these new NA extraction methods,
the extracted NA is often directly amplified on the paper/membrane disc, which is
particularly useful for developing POC LionX systems. In contrast, the solid-phase
extraction method is not suitable for NA testing at the POC due to its multiple sample manipulation steps and heavy dependence on laboratory equipment. To simplify
the system operation and enable highly sensitive molecular detection platforms for
POC diagnostics, microfluidic systems that integrate the solid-phase-based NA
extraction, amplification, and detection into a single reaction chamber were recently
43,44,64–67
designed and adopted by existing LionX platforms. In addition, microflui-
68–73
dic paper-based analytical devices (mPADs) represent another promising

(\\up{\\upmu A D s})^{68-73}

* * *

Figure 2. Schematic Illustration of Major Methods for NA Extraction and Amplification
(A) Column-affinity, solid-phase-based NA extraction.

(A) Column-affinity, solid-phase-based NA extraction.
(B) Magnetic bead NA extraction.

(B) Magnetic bead NA extraction.
(C) Paper-based NA extraction by filtration-based isolation.

(C) Paper-based NA extraction by filtration-based isolation.
(D) RT-PCR amplification method.

(D) RT-PCR amplification method.
(E) RT-LAMP amplification method.

(E) RT-LAMP amplification method.
(F) NASBA amplification method. dsDNA, double-stranded DNA.

platform suitable for POC diagnostics that could successfully integrate the main
59,74–78
processing steps involved in infectious disease diagnosis.

NA-based testing of viral infection has a great advantage over serological testing,
with the capability of directly detecting pathogenic DNA or RNA genes in minute
79
quantities with a limit of detection (LOD) down to a single pathogen. During the
early acute phase of SARS-CoV-2 infection, the virus replicates rapidly but antibodies produced by our immune system are not yet detectable. Thus, COVID-19
diagnosis should rely on molecular NA amplification, through reverse transcription
oftheviralRNAintocDNAfollowedbycDNAamplification(Figure 2D). Among
80,81
many amplification technologies, qRT-PCR is considered to be highly sensitive
and is thus commonly used in clinical testing. This reliable test has displaced the con-
82,83
ventional northern blotting-based assays and has become the gold standard for
early clinical diagnosis of pathogenic infections. The qRT-PCR testing has already
demonstrated satisfactory sensitivity and specificity in amplifying and detecting a
84,85
variety of viral RNAs, such as the ones from SARS-CoV, acute Middle East respi-
86,87 84,88 89–91
ratory syndrome (MERS)-CoV, influenza, and Zika viruses. Presently,
the majority of COVID-19 suspected cases are screened via qRT-PCR
10,11,18,92,93–96
tests. Note that the qRT-PCR tests typically have a lengthy laboratory
workflow requiring multiple solution operation steps and relying on sophisticated
equipment for thermal cycling and optical signal detection. It may not be a
viable option for the screening of COVID-19 at locations where well-equipped

NUCLEIC ACID AMPLIFICATION METHODS laboratories and highly trained technicians are absent (e.g., at ports of entry and in
remote regions).

To circumvent the demanding thermal cycling of the RT-PCR-based amplification,
new methods have been developed for enabling exponential NA amplification at
97–99
constant and relatively low temperatures. A practical alternative for cost-effective and rapid RNA amplification is reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal
100,101
amplification (RT-LAMP). This method (Figure 2E) was designed to directly
amplify specific reversely transcripted cDNA through incubation at a fixed temperature (65 C) through only one-step reverse transcription and achieved an efficiency
9
of 10 amplicons of genomic DNA in less than 1 h. It has been demonstrated that RT-
102
LAMP can provide a sensitivity 10-fold higher than that of qRT-PCR. Recently,
RT-LAMP-based assays have been deployed for rapid and specific detection of path-
103–105
ogenic avian influenza and respiratory viruses (including SARS-CoV-2 and
102–104,106–109
other infectious diseases in humans, and have also been successfully
110–114
integrated into several LionX platforms.

\ 0^{9}

In contrast to RT-LAMP that utilizes only one enzyme such as DNA polymerase for
target NA amplification, other commonly used isothermal amplification methods
require several enzymes and proteins for the amplification process. For instance, recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) requires DNA polymerase and recombi-
115,116
nase enzymes. It can reach a similar amplification efficiency within 30 min at
a comparably low temperature (37 C) and has been implemented on LionX
117,118 119
systems. The RPA has also been applied to SARS-CoV-2 detection. Helicase-dependent amplification (HDA) utilizes an additional helicase enzyme unwinding the target DNA at a constant temperature (37 C) and allows elimination of the
heat-induced denaturation step of the PCR method for viral amplification and detec-
120 121
tion. The exponential amplification reaction (EXPAR) is unique among these
isothermal methods because it does not require primers and performs NA amplification through only one specifically designed target template. NA sequence-based
amplification (NASBA) was specifically designed to amplify any single-stranded
NA at a relatively low temperature (41 C) for efficient molecular viral detection (Fig-
9 122,123
ure 2F) and can achieve up to 10 genomic amplicons in 1.5–2 h. Quantitative
NASBA (QT-NASBA) is highly sensitive and can achieve an amplification perfor-
122
mance comparable with that of the primary qPCR method. All the isothermal
amplification methods described above eliminate the need for an expensive highprecision thermal cycler used in conventional PCR-based methods and possess
the potential of providing simple, rapid, and inexpensive molecular tools for use
by LionX systems for detection of infectious diseases in POC settings. Such LionX
systems that integrate NA extraction, isothermal amplification, and signal quantifi-
58,74,76,78,124,125
cation have been successfully developed, which will be further discussed in the section Integrated Lab-in-on-an-X Systems.

(37^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C})

(37^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C})

10^{9}

* * *

Figure 3. Schematic Illustration of Commonly Used Signal Detection Methods in NA Testing
(A) Optical detection. LFA, lateral flow assay; LFT, latreral flow test; SERS, surface-enhanced Raman scattering.

(A) Optical detection. LFA, lateral flow assay; LFT, latreral flow test; SERS, surface-enhanced Raman scattering.
(B) Electrochemical sensing. HRP, horseradish peroxidase; TMB, tetramethylbenzidine; RE, reference electrode; WE, working electrode; CE, counter

(B) Electrochemical sensing. HRP, horseradish peroxidase; TMB, tetramethylbenzidine; RE, reference electrode; WE, working electrode; CE, counter
electrode.
(C) Electronic sensing. FET, field-effect transistor.

(C) Electronic sensing. FET, field-effect transistor.
(D) Nanopore-based sequencing.

(D) Nanopore-based sequencing.
AuNP, gold nanoparticle.

AuNP, gold nanoparticle.

to confirm the infection of the patient while a single target gene assay can easily
29,126
miss the low-level positive samples and the mutant virus.

SIGNAL DETECTION METHODS

During or after NA amplification, the amount of amplified NA needs to be quantified
to provide the final results of virus detection. A variety of signal detection methods
have been employed in NA-based testing, and some of them have been commonly
used in existing COVID-19 diagnostic systems (see Table S1). This section summarizes the typical signal detection techniques (Figure 3) commonly used in NA analysis, including optical detection, electrochemical sensing, electronic sensing, and
nanopore-based sequencing.

Among these optical detection strategies, fluorescent detection is the most thriving
and commonly used method in NA detection. As summarized in Table S1, 80% (12
out of 15) of the recently approved COVID-19 diagnostic systems are based on fluorescent signal readout for quantifying the PCR products. Fluorescent probes are key
to fluorescent detection systems, which can be conjugated onto target amplicons
nonspecifically by intercalating fluorescent dye molecules (such as SYBR green4)
with any double-stranded DNAs present in the sample, or specifically by binding single-stranded oligonucleotides labeled with fluorescent reporters to target amplicons with complementary sequences. The specific target probes designed by

* * *

Perspective

incorporating fluorophores and quenchers promise higher specificity and sensitivity
127
in NA recognition. As a result, combining mature amplification tools (such as
128 114
RT-PCR, LAMP, and NASBA129) and specific target probing technology is
the predominant strategy for detecting virusessuchasSARS-CoVandSARS-CoV-
11,130
2\. For example, the detection of SARS-CoV by fluorescent detection has
131
been reported with an LOD of 1 copy RNA per reaction by RT-PCR. The detection
of COVID-19 as low as 100 copies/mL by RT-PCR has also been realized by two of
the commercial systems listed in Table S1. Besides, synthetic biology-based techniques have also been integrated with optical detection systems to improve the limitation of conventional PCR-based methods. In particular, the emerging clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-based tools have been reported to detect target RNAs with extremely high specificity by effectively cleaving
132–134
DNA fragments modified with fluorescent probe-quencher pairs. Working
135–138
protocols specifically for COVID-19 diagnosis were also reported, providing
another promising avenue for quick diagnosis of COVID-19 based on fluorescence
detection.

Fluorescent signals are generally detected by photodetectors or photomultipliers
completely compatible with integrated electronics, which greatly facilitates the integration of fluorescence measurement modules into diagnostic systems. Under
resource-limited situations, handheld UV flashlights, cellphones, and cameras can
also be employed for constructing sample-in-answer-out (SIAO) diagnostic plat-
139,140
forms, thus making the optical detection module more portable and multifunctional. For example, by using a smartphone fluorescence reader, a detection
3 57
limit of 2.8 3 10 DNA copies was achieved.

2.8\\times10^{3}

Another type of optical readout for NA testing is the colorimetric signal, which can be
observed on LFT strips. Conventionally, the LFT is used for rapid testing of protein
markers. Because of its simple device structure and autonomous sample/reagent manipulation (through a one-time lateral flow), the LFT strip has also been used for NA detection. The rapid visual readout of color intensity changes on an LFT strip completely
meets the requirements of POC NA testing. Generally, detection of target amplicons
is achieved by hybridization of gold nanoparticle (AuNP)-conjugated target singlestranded RNAs with single-stranded capture DNAs immobilized at the test line of a strip
and reading of the color change of the test line by naked eyes, a portable colorimetric
110
reader, or simply a cellphone camera. The colorimetric detection can also be performed in aqueous solutions. For example, well-dispersed AuNPs conjugated with capture DNA are red in color; when target DNA presents, AuNP conjugates aggregate due
to hybridization of the target DNA with the capture DNA, resulting in a color change of
the AuNP-DNA conjugates from red to blue due to the increment of particle size and
13
coupling of the plasmon band. As a result, the DNA testing result can be evaluated
by the color change. However, the NA hybridization design works well only for single-
129
stranded target DNAs/RNAs (e.g., the product of NASBA method). For doublestranded DNAs produced by PCR, RPA, and LAMP, the hybridization between the target
DNA and capture probe is not feasible, and the detection of double-stranded target
76
DNA is usually realized by streptavidin-biotin conjugations. Quantum dot barcodebased diagnostic sensors have also been developed for high-throughput detection
33,141
of DNA markers, whereby a smartphone was used for taking photographs of the
barcode sensor with a custom-written program for image processing and colorimetric
signal quantification. Note that the sensitivity of the above optical sensing techniques
for NA without amplification is usually not high enough, and amplification-free testing
of NA samples using optical detection methods may cause false-negative or false-pos-
142
itive results.

* * *

**ll**

## Perspective

To enhance the sensitivity of optical detection, metallic nanomaterials such as AuNPs and silver NPs were applied to modify the detection substrate or target mole- cule to achieve surface plasmon resonance (SPR) or surface-enhanced Raman scat- tering (SERS). 143 For example, an LOD of 4.8 pg/mL was achieved on a portable SPR biosensor designed for the Enterovirus 71 test. 144 It was also reported that the fluorescence signal of a single dye probe bounded on a Zika viral RNA can be enhanced by orders of magnitude by creating a hotspot between optical antennas and metallic nanoparticles because of the SERS effect. 145 SERS-based rapid identi- fication of virulence determinants in influenza viruses with 100% sensitivity and 100% selectivity has also been achieved. 146 Through signal enhancement strategies, the sensitivity of biosensors increases dramatically; samples without molecular amplifi- cation may be detected. Optical signal enhancement is a promising candidate for amplification-free DNA analysis, 143 but these optical enhancement methods usually require complicated, time-consuming processes for sample substrate preparation. 147

The traditional gel electrophoresis is also a popular method for visualization of amplified DNA molecules, and has been widely used in lab sample analysis due to its simplicity and reliability. However, it is a tedious and time-consuming process and involves a bulky gel bed setup; thus, it is not commonly used in clinical NA testing. 128 Since the 1990s, integration and parallelization of NA analyses on capil- lary electrophoresis-based microfluidic systems have been widely investigated, which enables efficient on-chip RNA/DNA testing; 148 however, these systems are generally complicated when both precise flow control and optical detection are needed, 149 hampering its usability in practical applications. In summary, optical detection methods are generally suitable for use on integrated diagnostic systems for NA-based virus testing, and can provide merits such as high testing throughput, satisfactory sensitivity and specificity, and good cost efficiency. However, it is still challenging to realize some specific NA testing functions, such as amplification- free NA detection and real-time NA sequencing of RNA/DNA solely based on optical detection methods. Other NA detection methods based on electrochemical and electrical readouts have also been investigated to expand the diversity of NA testing methods.

Electrochemical Sensing Besides optical detection methods, electrochemical sensing is another widely used category of signal detection methods for NA testing, 150–152 which provides many valuable merits such as high sensitivity and specificity, simple device structure, and excellent compatibility with micro- and nanoengineering platforms. A typical electrochemical DNA sensor includes three contact electrodes, a working electrode (WE), a counter electrode, and a reference electrode, all inside a reaction reservoir, with the WE surface-functionalized with capture DNA probes for target DNA seg- ments (Figure 3B). Detection of the target DNA is based on measuring changes of electric signals such as current, potential, and impedance from the three electrodes, which are caused by hybridization of the target DNA in the sample and the capture probe on the WE and the related chemical reactions. 153

Figure 3B illustrates the

typical sandwich-hybridization-based DNA electrochemical sensing, where a DNA segment conjugated with an electrochemical reporter (horseradish peroxidase \[HRP\]) serves as the label for reacting with its substrate and producing a current signal.

To achieve specific testing, the complementary capture DNA is immobilized on the WE through physical absorption or covalent bonding. Thin-film gold is one of the

Matter 3, 628–651, September 2, 2020 most popular WE materials, and stable covalent immobilization of capture DNA on
gold substrates can be obtained through organic linkers such as alkanethiol, cyclic
disulfides, phosphorothioated adenine tags, and functionalized self-assembled
151
monolayers. A variety of other WE materials and biofunctionalization strategies
have also been employed to improve the uniformity and stability of the DNA probes
on the WE. For instance, carbon-nanomaterial-based WEs have been fabricated to
take advantage of their high surface-to-volume ratio and high electrical conductivity,
and COOH-functionalized polymers were used for covalent bonding of the amine-
154
terminated DNA via carbodiimide chemistry. Electrodes with wrinkled nano-/microstructures were applied to prevent aggregation of DNAs, which usually happens
155
on flat surfaces.

Compared with optical detection methods, electrochemical sensing has several advantages. For instance, amplification-free NA detection can be realized by employ-
143
ing functional nanomaterials for redox modification or functionalization. By using
electrospun semi-conductive manganese(III) oxide (Mn2O3) nanofibers as sensing
electrodes, the detection of Dengue DNA hybridization with an LOD as low as
21 156
120 3 10 M was demonstrated. Direct detection of microRNAs in serum
157
samples was also demonstrated with high sensitivity and specificity. In addition,
label-free NA detection can be realized through electrochemical sensing with high
sensitivity. An example of label-free detection of Zika viral cDNA amplicons by using
disposable three-contact electrode sensors was reported, whereby a limit detection
158
of 25 nM was achieved. Diagnosis of hepatitis A virus (HAV) was implemented on
a capture DNA-modified gold electrode by monitoring direct hybridization of cDNA,
159
and an LOD of 6.94 fg/mL was reported. Another bonus of electrochemical DNA
sensing is that the sensors can be made reusable by regenerating the WE surfaces
through strategies such as switchable or looped capture probes and washing-based
160,161
dehybridization steps, which could significantly lower the cost of NA testing.

(\\mathsf{M n}\_{2}\_{3})

120\ \\times\ 10^{-21}

Electronic sensors are developed based on semiconductor materials whose electronic properties are sensitive to the binding of biomolecules on the material
surface, and they are typically implemented in the form of field-effect transistors
(FETs). Very similar to electrochemical sensors, in the FET NA sensor design, capture
DNA probes are immobilized on the surface of semiconductor FET channel; the
output signal, caused by the hybridization of target NA with the capture DNA, is
obtained by monitoring the change of electric current through the FET channel (Fig-
165 166 167
ure 3C). Silicon nanowires, carbon nanotubes, graphene, and two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides168 are popular semiconductor nanomaterials for constructing FET-based NA sensors. As these nanomaterials are highly
sensitive to surface DNA hybridization, the FET-based NA sensing can achieve ultrahigh sensitivity and thus enables amplification-free virus detection. For instance,

Electronic Sensing
Electronic sensors are developed based on semiconductor materials whose elec-

\ 0^{5}

* * *

**ll**

## Perspective

amplification-free detection of DNA lengths by enzyme functionalized CNT-based FET nanocircuits has been demonstrated. 169 A recent study demonstrates the detection of unamplified target DNA via CRISPR/Cas9 immobilized on a gra- phene-based FET sensor, with an LOD down to 1.7 fM and assay time of 15 min. 170 However, batch fabrication of high-quality FET sensors with consistent analytical performance is still challenging, mainly because of quality variations of the channel nanomaterial and device fabrication. With further advances in nanoma- terial synthesis and micro-/nanofabrication, it is expected that more market-viable FET-based LionX platforms will emerge.

Nanopore-Based Sequencing Nanopore-based gene sequencing is one of the most promising next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies. 171 Besides the widely recognized application in whole-genome sequencing, it has also been used for detecting various types of viruses such as porcine epidemic diarrhea-related virus, 147 HIV, 172 and hepatitis B virus. 173 The working mechanism of nanopore-based sequencing, as illustrated in

Figure 3D, is based on the real-time, base-by-base electrical reading of a single-

stranded long DNA or RNA while it passes through a nanopore driven by an electric field. 174 To date, the most effective nanopore for DNA sequencing is fabricated by self-assembling proteins or peptides, while nanopores fabricated by solid-state ma- terials and two-dimensional nanomaterials such as graphene and MoS2 have also been investigated. 175

Oxford Nanopore Technologies is one of the industrial pioneers in NGS, and their sequencing platforms have been successfully applied to sequencing the SARS- CoV-2 strains at the early stage of the COVID-19 pandemic. 31 Because of the limited length ( ~~30,000 nucleotides) of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome, the time for sequencing the entire virus genome by the Oxford sequencing platform was re- ported to be around 1 h. 176 Liu et al. 177 reported the application of nanopore plat- forms to sequence amplified COVID-19 DNA fragments within a few minutes. Note that the preparation of DNA/RNA samples and the initialization of the sequencing system are still relatively time consuming (~~ 7 h) for COVID-19 RNA sequencing. 178

A useful capability of the nanopore-based sequencing is that its real-time, single- base-resolution readout can identify mutations of the virus immediately during the spread of the pandemic, and thus provide substantial information for further epide- miological analysis. 177 The nanopore sequencing system can also identify various types of viral targets simultaneously, based on the established SARS-CoV-2 Gen- Bank. 179 At its current stage, the nanopore-based sequencing technology is more suitable for virus genome identification amid a pandemic rather than clinical diag- nosis. 31 However, with ongoing research efforts on developing nanopore-based biosensing technologies, 180,181 it is highly plausible that the sequencing-based NA detection method will become practical for integration with the LionX systems for viral infection diagnosis.

INTEGRATED LAB-In/On-AN-X PLATFORMS The LionX diagnostic systems provide multiple choices for both laboratory-based and POC virus detection, which could significantly enrich the COVID-19 diagnostic toolset. The integrated LionX systems often adopt miniaturized fluidic manipulation platforms to reduce the system footprint and automate a streamlined virus detection process including sample preparation, NA amplification, and signal detection to avoid or reduce manual operations and minimize operation errors. An example of typical LionX systems is the Roche cobas Liat PCR System based on a lab-in-a-

Matter 3, 628–651, September 2, 2020

* * *

Perspective

tube design, which has been successfully applied to clinical diagnosis of influenza vi-
182,183 184
rus and SARS-CoV-2 infections. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, enormous
research activities on diagnostic LionX systems led to many promising solutions for
25,185
testing various viral infections. Researchers and companies are now adapting
186,187
some of these most promising platforms for COVID-19 diagnostics. In this section, we summarize the existing LionX systems in the hope of providing useful information for the ongoing and future activities in this area.

Lab-in-a-Tube Systems
The traditional clinical virus testing procedure, including NA extraction, amplifica-

Lab-in-a-Tube Systems
The traditional clinical virus testing procedure, including NA extraction, amplification, and detection, is primarily conducted in various tubes/plates. The lab-in-atube platforms integrate new analytical techniques and fluid manipulation functions
into the widely used laboratory tubes/plates, which simplifies assay operations and
makes it less dependent on laboratory equipment and resources. These merits make
the lab-in-a-tube diagnostics particularly promising for use on the site and/or in
resource-limited settings. Note that there is another ‘‘lab-in-a-tube’’ concept of us-
188
ing rolled-up microtubes for analytical applications, which is beyond the scope of
discussions here. The lab-in-a-tube diagnostics are generally compatible with major
laboratory equipment and conceptually easy to adopt by clinicians. It should be
pointed out that, given the nature of multi-step operations in virus testing, it is
challenging to streamline the entire workflow in unmodified commercial tube/plate
architectures in an integrated and automatic fashion. To form integrated lab-in-atube systems, customized tube-shaped cartridges (e.g., the Roche cobas Liat PCR
System) need to be developed to realize automated multi-step fluid operations.
This subsection briefly introduces recent advances in lab-in-a-tube diagnostics,
and some of the typical designs are illustrated in Figures 4A–4E.

To avoid tube-to-tube sample transfer, a two-stage isothermal amplification process
was integrated into one tube, where the first RPA step was conducted in the tube cap
and the subsequent LAMP step was conducted in the tube after closing the tube cap
and mixing of the LAMP reagents with the RPA solution in the cap (Figure 4A). This
two-stage-amplification, closed-tube diagnostic assay was demonstrated to test
spiked COVID-19 samples with significantly enhanced sensitivity over RT-PCR,
and can be conducted in non-laboratory settings (e.g., at home, in clinics, and at
109
ports of entry) with very limited resources. Virus detection processes can also
be integrated into single plastic capillaries or pipette tips. For example, integrated
microcapillary-based LAMP with all reagents and DNA extraction card preloaded in
a capillary was developed to test CYP2C19 gene from crude blood samples without
192 191
any sophisticated instruments (Figure 4E). Similarly, Lu et al. developed a
pipette tip-based NA test that integrates NA extraction, LAMP, and signal readout
in a single pipette tip (Figure 4D), allowing for detection of Ebola virus with an LOD

* * *

**ll**

## Perspective

Figure 4. The LionX Systems for NA-Based Virus Detection

(AE) Lab-in-a-tube systems. (A) Closed-tube assay for COVID-19 diagnosis. 109

(B) Integration of tube-based diagnostic with a smartphone.
189

(C) Intube simplified assays by tableting reagents. 190

(D) High-throughput sample-to-answer detection of DNA within micropipette tips.
191

(E) Integration of
NA precontraction, amplification, and detection in a microcapillary. 192 (FI) Lab-on-a-chip systems. (F) Multiplexed integrated microfluidic system for influenza detection. 193

(G) Instrument-free microfluidic platform for Zika
virus detection. 194

(H) The integrated centrifugal microfluidic-circular fluorescent probe-mediated isothermal NA amplification system.
195

(I) A paperbased microfluidic platform for malaria diagnosis. 196 (JL) Other LionX systems. (J) The lab-in-a-box system with the freeze-dried and cell-free techniques. 197

(K) The lab-in-a-cartridge system utilizing the
droplet magnetofluidics technique. 198

(L) The lab-on-a-drone system that realized pinpoint deployment of a smartphone-based diagnostic platform.
199

as low as 2 copies of target NA fragments. High-throughput, simultaneous detection of 40 samples can be achieved by using a multi-channel pipette.

Besides the academic research summarized above, several commercial lab-in-a- tube systems for COVID-19 diagnostics have also been regulatorily approved recently (see Table S1). A typical example is the Roche cobas Liat PCR System, which automatically performs NA extraction, PCR, and signal readout in a customized tube. The system was initially applied to testing of influenza A/B viruses 183,201 and recently adapted to COVID-19 diagnosis.

Lab-on-a-Chip Systems Microfluidics and lab-on-a-chip technologies provide miniaturized solutions for on-chip fluid manipulation and analytical testing, and have been extensively investigated for developing integrated diagnostic platforms with all assay steps automatically carried out on a microfluidic chip. The lab-on-a-chip systems have many advantages such as low consumption of samples and reagents, high level of integration, high sensitivity, low cost, rapid reaction, and short TAT; all these fea- tures are particularly valuable for POC diagnostics. There have been many reports on developing integrated lab-on-a-chip systems for detection of various pathogens such as bacteria and viruses. 202–205 This subsection only discusses some of the typical lab-on-a-chip systems for virus detection and highlights the recent reports on using microfluidic platforms for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 and other viruses.

Matter 3, 628–651, September 2, 2020

* * *

For a more comprehensive and detailed review on microfluidic systems for NA
testing and pathogen detection, readers are referred to other review arti-
25,202–204
cles.

Based on conventional hollow-channel designs of the microfluidic device, integrated
193,194,206–208
lab-on-a-chip systems have been developed for virus detection. For
193
instance, Shen et al. developed an integrated microfluidic system for influenza
A virus detection and subtyping (Figure 4F). The system is capable of automatically
conducting virus extraction and purification, RT-PCR-based amplification, and fluorescence signal detection on the same microfluidic chip. Magnetic microbeads were
used for virus extraction and washing, and pneumatic microvalves for on-chip fluid
manipulation. The system achieved an LOD ranging from 40 to 3,000 copies for
194
different virus subtypes. Song et al. developed an instrument-free microfluidic
platform with a single microfluidic device for Zika virus detection (Figure 4G).
Although the system can perform on-chip NA extraction/purification/enrichment,
RT-LAMP amplification, and colorimetric DNA detection on the same chip, reagents
206
and washing buffers still need to be added manually. Wang et al. developed an
eight-channel microfluidic array device integrated with a portable LAMP amplification system for POC screening of respiratory viruses within 1 h, which achieved
high sensitivity in clinical sample testing. Recently, an automated CRISPR-based microfluidic chip and its fluid manipulation and signal detection platform were de-
209
signed to avoid the sample preparation and amplification steps. However, the
assay sensitivity and selectivity cannot reach the levels of standard assays without
207
the amplification step. Targeting COVID-19 diagnostics, Sun et al. recently reported a smartphone-based multiplexing NA detection system integrating a silicon
microfluidic chip for LAMP amplification and a smartphone for fluorescence signal
detection. No NA extraction step was realized on the microfluidic chip, and
repeated manual pipetting was required during the assay.

Centrifugal microfluidics, also called compact disk (CD)-based microfluidics, integrates multiple assay steps on a CD-shaped microfluidic chip in which solutions
210,211
are transported inside microchannels by spinning-induced centrifugal forces.
A centrifugal microfluidic system uses a motor to spin the chip at different speed
profiles to enable multi-step solution mixing and assay reactions, and relies on passive on-chip valves to regulate the fluid transports. The CD chip stores all required
reagents, which are added to a reaction microchamber at different assay steps.
Thus, such systems are particularly powerful for realizing streamlined multi-step
NA testing. A portable centrifugal microfluidic system has been developed to detect
195
influenza A H3N2 virus (Figure 4H), whereby the virus RNA is extracted via a bindwash-elute protocol on silica-coated magnetic beads. The CD chip can aliquot the
preamplified RNA into 13 chambers through centrifugation for multiplexed amplification and detection. Because of its promising features such as high portability and
short TAT, the system is being adapted to the SARS-CoV-2 detection with a short
212
TAT of 30–40 min. There are also other centrifugal microfluidic systems for detec-
214
tion of viruses such as African swine fever virus213 and dengue virus. More discussions on centrifugal microfluidics for pathogen detection can be found in a focused
211
review.

215,216
mPADs, including the widely used LFT strips, represent another promising
platform technology for virus detection. mPADs were initially designed for equipment-free POC testing in remote and/or resource-limited settings, and mainly rely
on passive capillary flow transport in porous paper-like substrates. Thus, these devices are inherently suitable for assays requiring no or limited fluid manipulations.

* * *

**ll**

## Perspective

For paper-based NA testing platforms, repeated manual pipetting is usually involved for adding reagents and the transfer of intermediate reaction prod- ucts. 129,217–220 With various fluidic manipulation strategies developed for paper chips, 221 mPADs have also been extended to more complex, multi-step analytical assays including NA testing. 222,223 Reboud et al. 196 reports an integrated paper- plastic hybrid microfluidic device (Figure 4I) for NA-based testing of malaria in finger-prick blood. The device integrates an origami mPAD for DNA extraction and processing, a plastic microfluidic device for LAMP amplification, and four LFT strips for colorimetric signal readout. The assembly of the origami mPAD and the plastic device enables transfer of DNA elutes by paper folding, and finger-pressing pumps on the plastic device allow manual flow control. Rodriguez et al. 224 developed an in- tegrated paper-based NA testing device capable of on-chip DNA extraction, LAMP amplification, and lateral flow colorimetric detection. The device was demonstrated for rapid testing of human papillomavirus in crude cervical specimens for cervical cancer diagnosis. To meet the need for COVID-19 diagnostics, several groups have developed SARS-CoV-2 tests by combining off-chip RNA extraction/amplifica- tion and on-chip CRISPR-based NA detection on LFT strips. 136,225,226 The easy oper- ation of the LFT strip greatly facilitates the NA detection step of these assays.

Lab-in-a-Box Systems In response to the outbreak of infectiousdiseasessuchasCOVID-19,theurgent deployment of diagnostic tools in the developing countries or remote areas has brought multiple requirements for diagnostic systems such as high portability, easy operation, low cost, low contamination risk, and short TAT. The lab-on-a-chip systems represent an excellent technical solution to meet these needs. There are several other types of LionX systems that also hold great potential to be applied to virus detection in remote and/or resource-limited settings, including the lab-in- a-box system that integrates all required reagent synthesis and assay tools in a portable box for self-contained and mobile deployment of molecular diagnostics; the lab-in-a-cartridge system that encloses sample processing, amplification and signal detection all inside a cartridge for automated SIAO testing; and the lab-on- a-drone system that realizes pinpoint deployment of diagnostic tools through an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). These LionX systems provide self-contained, cost- efficient diagnostic solutions for both laboratory and POC environments, and can be used to quickly equip suburban/remote communities and poor regions with mo- lecular testing capabilities during a public health emergency.

The lab-in-a-box design includes all needed virus testing tools in a portable box and aims for rapid deployment of molecular diagnostic capacity to any location with basic resources. Such a system can be used to quickly equip a resource-limited lab- oratory or clinic to meet the local diagnostic needs. The design emphasizes more the self-containment and rapid deployment of the boxed system rather than miniaturi- zation and automation of the assay platform. One lab-in-a-box system is currently under development by Pardee’s group at the University of Toronto to implement rapid, low-cost COVID-19 diagnosis in low-resource settings. 227,228 The portable box is about twice the size of a standard cupboard moving box and can serve as a ‘‘pop-up’’ diagnostic laboratory deployable to any place in need, providing a total capacity of 14,000 COVID-19 tests. Importantly, this platform also possesses the capability of on-site reagent synthesis based on synthetic biology and thus is not limited to the disruption of global supply chains.

This lab-in-a-box platform is built on several previous studies on synthetic biology- based diagnostics. Pardee et al. reported a new method for long-term (>1

Matter 3, 628–651, September 2, 2020

* * *

Perspective

year), room-temperature storage of synthetic gene circuits by freeze-drying
commercially available cell-free expression systems on cellulose filter paper, which
opened up a new avenue of synthetic-biology-based diagnostics on paper. This
approach enables the inexpensive, sterile, and abiotic distribution of gene circuitbased reagents without refrigeration, andwasdemonstratedforfieldtestingof
218
strain-specific Ebola virus. This method was later combined with a synthetic
RNA sensor called toehold switches229 to perform low-cost POC testing of Zika vi-
129
rus. The use of freeze-dried, cell-free systems with long-term stability at room
temperature could alleviate the restrictions of both live-cell biosynthesis and cold-
197
chain distribution requirements. Pardee et al. also demonstrated the use of this
paper-based synthetic platform for production of a diverse range of functionally
active products, including antimicrobial peptides, vaccines, affinity conjugates,
and small molecules (Figure 4J). This technique will allow on-site reagent synthesis
for COVID-19 diagnostics on the lab-in-a-box system.

Lab-in-a-Cartridge Systems
A highly integrated diagnostic system usually prefers to integrate sample preparation,

Lab-in-a-Cartridge Systems
A highly integrated diagnostic system usually prefers to integrate sample preparation,
NA extraction, and amplification into a single disposable cartridge. Besides the labon-a-chip approach that provides a miniaturized fluidic system for process integration,
plastic cartridges with integrated fluid channels/chambers also represent a marketviable solution. The lab-in-a-cartridge systems employ plastic cartridges for streamlined
198
fluid manipulation and multi-step NA testing. Shin et al. presented a lab-in-a-cartridge qRT-PCR system (Figure 4K) for chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) diagnosis in a
SIAO fashion. By using droplet magnetofluidics (DM) for sample processing, the
extruded-well design of the cartridge enables precise thermal control of the reagents
at suitable ranges for PCR thermal cycling and melt curve analysis. The DM-based
manipulation enables the necessary purification of NA targets from clinical samples to
obtain quantitative and consistent assay results. The system showed high analytical
sensitivity down to 4,500 IU/mL on HCV RNA-positive samples and a high correlation
230
with laboratory-based viral quantification and benchtop PCR. Liu et al. proposed a
disposable self-heating cartridge containing computer numerical control (CNC)-milled
fluid channels and a chemical heater for isothermal NA amplification and fluorescent
signal detection with keychain-mounted UV light. The three-dimensional cartridge architecture also provides a larger space for more flexible channel design for fluid manipulation and better component arrangement. Besides the academic research, a commercial
lab-in-a-cartridge system, the Cepheid GeneXpert System, has been successfully
231
applied to COVID-19 diagnostics. Its integrated Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 cartridge
realizes automated fluid transport through plunger rod-operated valve rotation and
232
sonication-based virus lysis through an external sonic horn. Xu et al. reported a labin-a-cartridge system that integrates RNA extraction and one-color, three-chamber
pseudo-multiplexing RT-PCR for rapid influenza virus detection within 2.5 h. The cartridge embedded with microfluidic channels provides precise dispensing of aliquots
for multi-chamber RT-PCR testing. The performance of the integrated RNA extraction,
custom-built thermal cycler, and optical detection module is comparable with that of
manual RNA purification and commercial thermal cyclers.

Lab-on-a-Drone Systems
A lab-on-a-drone diagnostic system integrates a compact, lightweight lab-in-a-box

* * *

**ll**

## Perspective

(Figure 4L). The system leverages convective thermocycling to isothermally perform PCR using a single heater and only requires a 5-V USB power source (through battery, solar, or hand crank action) for operation. A smartphone was used for time-lapsed fluorescence detection. A unique design of this system is the use of the four onboard rotors for standard centrifugation-based sample preparation. This lab-on-a-drone system makes full use of the high mobility of commercial drones and extends its function to mobile molecular diagnostics.

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK In the past decades, our global community has experienced several public health emer- gencies and crises caused by viral infectious diseases such as SARS, Ebola, Zika, MERS, and COVID-19. The spread of these viruses in large populations requires rapid and ac- curate diagnostics that can be conducted in a streamlined and integrated fashion. This Perspective reviewed the research activities on developing integrated micro- and nano- systems for NA-based virus testing. Many of these systems have been conceptually pre- sented and implemented in the forms of LionX platforms. We summarized the state-of- the-art technologies for NA extraction, amplification, and signal detection that have been adopted in the existing LionX systems, and discussed the typical LionX diagnostic systems that have been applied to diagnosis of viral infectious diseases including COVID-19. We hope that this Perspective can inspire more research and development activities to help combat the current COVID-19 pandemic and prepare our healthcare systems for future public health emergencies and crises.

A variety of LionX systems have been developed for virus detection, all of which pro- vide viable solutions for different diagnostic scenarios including laboratory testing and POC diagnosis. The laboratory-based PCR-based assays, which are the major force fighting the COVID-19 pandemic, still faces certain challenges. 20 For instance, the conventional PCR-based assays require multi-step fluid manipulations that are realized either through manual or robotic pipetting, and take at least several hours to complete. In a global pandemic, there are many occasions that demand rapid vi- rus testing with satisfactory throughput outside a laboratory, for instance at the ports of entry or in remote regions. The LionX systems streamline operation steps of the NA-based virus testing, reduce or completely eliminate manual operations, often shorten the assay TAT, and lower the contamination risk. These systems have been successfully applied to the diagnosis of different viral infections. These systems could greatly contribute to the COVID-19 pandemic by providing alternative diag- nostic solutions to meet the significant demands for testing and tracing infection cases. The importance of rapid development of LionX systems for the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infections cannot be overemphasized.

Besides the LionX systems and its associated techniques we have introduced, there are several emerging trends worth mentioning. Firstly, CRISPR-based NA detection has provided a highly promising alternative method to PCR-based assays. 233–235

This has been applied on hollow-channel209 and paper-based136 microfluidic plat- forms for viral NA detection. The diagnostic assays based on CRSIPR techniques can produce accurate results within as short as 5 min without solid-phase extrac- tion. 209 Secondly, the isothermal NA amplification techniques such as LAMP have been increasingly used in LionX systems. 236 The LAMP reaction amplifies DNA with high specificity and efficiency under isothermal conditions, and has been confirmed to be effective for SARS-CoV-2 detection. 114,186 Thesimplesetupof the isothermal amplification-based platforms such as the Abbott ID Now System has significantly reduced the system weight and size and reduced the assay

Matter 3, 628–651, September 2, 2020

* * *

Perspective

237
TAT. It is anticipated that more compact systems with shorter TAT will appear for
COVID-19 diagnostics by combining microfluidic device designs and isothermal
testing. Thirdly, smartphone-based testing could further reduce the size and increase the integration level of LionX systems. In combination with a portable integrated system, a smartphone with a customized analytical application can efficiently
quantify the assay result without the specialized knowledge of a medical profes-
207,238
sional. The state-of-the-art smartphone, together with its integrated optics,
computation power, and communication functions, have been demonstrated to provide sufficient sensitivity, making it a powerful alternative to the professional analyt-
27
ical readers. Along with the remarkable progress of COVID-19 assay and detection
system development, the practical detection performance is required to be
constantly monitored given the potential for the virus to mutate, which could increase the risk of false-negative results13 and is an emerging challenge for the inte-
239
grated LionX diagnostic systems. A recent work identified 198 filtered recurrent
mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 genome based on up-to-date existing 7,710 assem-
4
blies, and estimated the mutation rate to be ~6 3 10 nucleotides/genome/year
240
for SARS-CoV-2, which is, fortunately, largely unremarkable for an RNA virus.
The ability to detect different emergent strains of SARS-CoV-2 may become necessary as the COVID-19 pandemic evolves.

\\sim6\\times10^{-4}

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental Information can be found online at [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt).
2020.06.015.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
COVID-19 Rapid Response Fund (grant number 419855), the Toronto COVID-19 Action Initiative Fund (grant number TCAI-508801), the Canada Foundation for Innovation (grant number JELF-38428), and the National Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (grant numbers RGPIN-2017-06374 and RGPAS-
2017-507980).

REFERENCES

1. World Health Organization. (2019). Corona 5. Chen, J. (2020). Pathogenicity and
   virus Disease. [https://www.who.int/emerg](https://www.who.int/emerg) transmissibility of 2019-nCoVa quick
   encies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019. overview and comparison with other
   emerging viruses. Microbes Infect. 22, 6971.
2. Worldometer COVID-19 Coronavirus
   Pandemic: Coronavirus Cases. [https://www](https://www/). 6\. Yi, Y., Lagniton, P.N.P., Ye, S., Li, E., and Xu,
   worldometers.info/coronavirus/. R.-H. (2020). COVID-19: what has been learned
   and to be learned about the novel coronavirus
3. World Health Organization. WHO Director-disease. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2020, 17531766.
   Generals Opening Remarks at the Media
4. Kumar, R., Shrivastava, T., Samal, S., Ahmed,
   Briefing on COVID-19 - 13 April 2020. https://
   S., and Parray, H.A. (2020). Antibody-based
   [www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/whotherapeutic](http://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/whotherapeutic) interventions: possible strategy
   director-general-s-opening-remarks-at-theto counter chikungunya viral infection. Appl.
   media-briefing-on-covid-1913-april-2020.
   Microbiol. Biotechnol. 104, 32093228.
5. Pang, J., Wang, M.X., Ang, I.Y.H., Tan, S.H.X.,
6. Zhao, J., Yuan, Q., Wang, H., Liu, W., Liao, X.,
   Lewis, R.F., Chen, J.I.-P., Gutierrez, R.A., Gwee,
   Su, Y., Wang, X., Yuan, J., Li, T., Li, J., et al.
   S.X.W., Chua, P.E.Y., Yang, Q., et al. (2020). (2020). Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in
   Potential rapid diagnostics, vaccine and
   patients of novel coronavirus disease 2019.
   therapeutics for 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-Clin. Infect. Dis. [https://doi.org/10.1101/](https://doi.org/10.1101/)
   nCoV): a systematic review. J. Clin. Med. 9,623.
   2020.03.02.20030189.

Z.Q. and X.L. conceived the theme and designed the manuscript structure. Z.Q.,
R.P., I.K.B., and X.L. wrote the manuscript.

09. Prestidge, M., and Amoore, Z. (2020). Purpose
    and options for testing for SARS-cov2 (the
    COVID-19 Virus) : considerations for world
    bank task teams managing COVID-19 fast
    track facility operations, 124. http://
    documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/
    145161586536712080/Purpose-and-Optionsfor-Testing-for-SARS-Cov2-the-COVID-19-
    Virus-Considerations-for-World-Bank-Task-
    Teams-Managing-COVID-19-Fast-Track-
    Facility-Operations.
10. U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
    Prevention (2020). CDC 2019-Novel
    Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Real-Time RT-PCR
    Diagnostic Panel, 112. [https://www.fda.gov/](https://www.fda.gov/)
    media/134922/download.
11. Corman, V.M., Landt, O., Kaiser, M.,
    Molenkamp, R., Meijer, A., Chu, D.K.W.,
    Bleicker, T., Bru¤ nink, S., Schneider, J.,
    Schmidt, M.L., et al. (2020). Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time
    RT-PCR. Eurosurveillance 25, [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
    10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.3.2000045.
12. Ai, T., Yang, Z., Hou, H., Zhan, C., Chen, C., Lv,
    W., Tao, Q., Sun, Z., and Xia, L. (2020).
    Correlation of chest CT and RT-PCR testing in
    coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in
    China: a report of 1014 cases. Radiology.
    [https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020200642](https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020200642).
13. Udugama, B., Kadhiresan, P., Kozlowski, H.N.,
    Malekjahani, A., Osborne, M., Li, V.Y.C.,
    Chen, H., Mubareka, S., Gubbay, J.B., and
    Chan, W.C.W. (2020). Diagnosing COVID-19:
    the disease and tools for detection. ACS
    Nano 14, 38223835.
14. World Health Organization. (2020). Advice on
    the use of point-of-care immunodiagnostic
    tests for COVID-19. [https://www.who.int/](https://www.who.int/)
    news-room/commentaries/detail/advice-onthe-use-of-point-of-care-immunodiagnostictests-for-covid-19.
15. SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic pipeline. https://
    [www.finddx.org/covid-19/pipeline/](http://www.finddx.org/covid-19/pipeline/).
16. COVID-19: list of authorized diagnostic
    devices for use against coronavirus. https://
    [www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/](http://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/)
    drugs-health-products/medical-devices/
    covid-19/diagnostic-devices-authorized.
    html.
17. US Food and Drug Administration.
    Emergency Use Authorizations (FDA). https://
    [www.fda.gov/medical-devices/emergencysituations-medical-devices/emergency-useauthorizations](http://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/emergencysituations-medical-devices/emergency-useauthorizations).
18. World Health Organization. (2020).
    Laboratory Testing for Coronavirus Disease
    2019 (COVID-19) in Suspected Human Cases,
19. [https://www.who.int/publications-detail/](https://www.who.int/publications-detail/)
    laboratory-testing-for-2019-novelcoronavirus-in-suspected-human-cases-
21. Jin, Y.H., Cai, L., Cheng, Z.S., Cheng, H.,
    Deng, T., Fan, Y.P., Fang, C., Huang, D.,
    Huang, L.Q., Huang, Q., et al. (2020). A rapid
    advice guideline for the diagnosis and
    treatment of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-
    nCoV) infected pneumonia (standard version).
    Mil. Med. Res. 7, 123.
22. Tang, Y.-W., Schmitz, J.E., Persing, D.H., and
    Stratton, C.W. (2020). Laboratory diagnosis of
    COVID-19: current issues and challenges.
    J. Clin. Microbiol. 58, [https://doi.org/10.1128/](https://doi.org/10.1128/)
    JCM.00512-20.
23. Zhang, J., Gharizadeh, B., Lu, D., Yue, J., Yu,
    M., Liu, Y., and Zhou, M. (2020). Navigating
    the pandemic response life cycle: molecular
    diagnostics and immunoassays in the context
    of COVID-19 management. IEEE Rev.
    Biomed. Eng. [https://doi.org/10.1109/RBME](https://doi.org/10.1109/RBME).
    2020.2991444.
24. Smith, E., Zhen, W., Manji, R., Schron, D.,
    Duong, S., and Berry, G.J. (2020). Analytical
    and clinical comparison of three nucleic acid
    amplification tests for SARS-CoV-2 detection.
    bioRxiv. [https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.14](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.14).
26. Hu, E. (2020). COVID-19 testing: challenges,
    limitations and suggestions for improvement.
    Preprints. [https://doi.org/10.20944/](https://doi.org/10.20944/)
    preprints202004.0155.v1.

diagnostic efforts. [https://www.clinicalla](https://www.clinicalla/)
bmanager.com/insight/pcr-based-methodslead-covid-19-diagnostic-efforts-21890.
25\. Zhu, H., Fohlerova·, Z., Peka· rek, J., Basova, E.,
and Neuzil, P. (2020). Recent advances in labon-a-chip technologies for viral diagnosis.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 153, 112041.
26\. (2019). An alternative medical diagnosis Saylan, Y., Erdem, O., Unal, S., and Denizli, A. ¤ ¤
method: biosensors for virus detection.
Biosensors 9,65.
27\. Yang, T., Wang, Y.-C., Shen, C.-F., and Cheng,
C.-M. (2020). Point-of-Care RNA-based
diagnostic device for COVID-19. Diagnostics
10, 165.
28\. Esbin, M.N., Whitney, O.N., Chong, S., Maurer,
A., Darzacq, X., and Tjian, R. (2020). Overcoming
the bottleneck to widespread testing: a rapid
review of nucleic acid testing approaches for
COVID-19 detection. RNA 26, 771783.
29\. Carter, L.J., Garner, L.V., Smoot, J.W., Li, Y.,
Zhou, Q., Saveson, C.J., Sasso, J.M., Gregg,
A.C., Soares, D.J., Beskid, T.R., et al. (2020).
Assay techniques and test development for
COVID-19 diagnosis. ACS Cent. Sci. 6, 591605.
30\. Zhou, P., Yang, X.-L., Wang, X.-G., Hu, B.,
Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.-R., Zhu, Y., Li, B.,
Huang, C.-L., et al. (2020). A pneumonia
outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of
probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270273.
31\. Lu, R., Zhao, X., Li, J., Niu, P., Yang, B., Wu, H.,
Wang, W., Song, H., Huang, B., Zhu, N., et al.
(2020). Genomic characterisation and
epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus:
implications for virus origins and receptor
binding. Lancet 395, 565574.
32\. Zhu, N., Zhang, D., Wang, W., Li, X., Yang, B.,
Song, J., Zhao, X., Huang, B., Shi, W., Lu, R.,
et al. (2020). A novel coronavirus from patients
with pneumonia in China, 2019. N. Engl. J.
Med. 382, 727733.
33\. Kelly-Cirino, C., Mazzola, L.T., Chua, A.,
Oxenford, C.J., and Van Kerkhove, M.D.
(2019). An updated roadmap for MERS-CoV
research and product development: focus on
diagnostics. BMJ Glob. Heal. 4, e001105.
34\. Pan, Y., Zhang, D., Yang, P., Poon, L.L.M., and
Wang, Q. (2020). Viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in
clinical samples. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20, 411412.
35\. Zou, L., Ruan, F., Huang, M., Liang, L., Huang,
H., Hong, Z., Yu, J., Kang, M., Song, Y., Xia, J.,
et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 viral load in upper
respiratory specimens of infected patients.
N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 11771179.
36\. Tahamtan, A., and Ardebili, A. (2020). Realtime RT-PCR in COVID-19 detection: issues
affecting the results. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn.
20, 453454.
37\. Pan, Y., Long, L., Zhang, D., Yan, T., Cui, S.,
Yang, P., Wang, Q., and Ren, S. (2020).
Potential false-negative nucleic acid testing
results for Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus 2 from thermal
inactivation of samples with low viral loads.
Clin. Chem. 801, 794801.

38. Tan, S.C., and Yiap, B.C. (2009). DNA, RNA,
    and protein extraction: the past and the
    present. J. Biomed. Biotechnol. 2009, 110.
39. Ali, N., Rampazzo, R.D.C.P., Costa, A.D.T.,
    and Krieger, M.A. (2017). Current nucleic acid
    extraction methods and their implications to
    point-of-care diagnostics. Biomed. Res. Int.
    2017, 113.
40. Xiang, X., Qiu, D., Hegele, R.D., and Tan, W.C.
    (2001). Comparison of different methods of
    total RNA extraction for viral detection in
    sputum. J. Virol. Methods 94, 129135.
41. Escobar, M.D., and Hunt, J.L. (2017). A costeffective RNA extraction technique from
    animal cells and tissue using silica columns.
    J. Biol. Methods 4,72.
42. Lee, H., Na, W., Park, C., Park, K.H., and Shin,
    S. (2018). Centrifugation-free extraction of
    circulating nucleic acids using immiscible
    liquid under vacuum pressure. Sci. Rep. 8,
44. Kim, J., Mauk, M., Chen, D., Qiu, X., Kim, J.,
    Gale, B., and Bau, H.H. (2010). A PCR reactor
    with an integrated alumina membrane for
    nucleic acid isolation. Analyst 135, 2408.
45. Oblath, E.A., Henley, W.H., Alarie, J.P., and
    Ramsey, J.M. (2013). A microfluidic chip
    integrating DNA extraction and real-time PCR
    for the detection of bacteria in saliva. Lab
    Chip 13, 13251332.
46. Devonshire, A.S., Whale, A.S., Gutteridge, A.,
    Jones, G., Cowen, S., Foy, C.A., and Huggett,
    J.F. (2014). Towards standardisation of cellfree DNA measurement in plasma: controls
    for extraction efficiency, fragment size bias
    and quantification. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 406,
48. Mauger, F., Dulary, C., Daviaud, C., Deleuze,
    J.F., and Tost, J. (2015). Comprehensive
    evaluation of methods to isolate, quantify,
    and characterize circulating cell-free DNA
    from small volumes of plasma. Anal. Bioanal.
    Chem. 407, 68736878.
49. Sherwood, J.L., Corcoran, C., Brown, H.,
    Sharpe, A.D., Musilova, M., and Kohlmann, A.
    (2016). Optimised pre-analytical methods
    improve KRAS mutation detection in
    circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) from
    patients with non-small cell lung cancer
    (NSCLC). PLoS One 11, 114.
50. Padhye, V.V., York, C., and Adam, B. (1997).
    Nucleic acid purification on silica gel and
    glass mixture. United States patent US
51. Promega Corporation.
52. Esser, K.-H., Marx, W.H., and Lisowsky, T.
    (2006). maxXbond: first regeneration system
    for DNA binding silica matrices. Nat. Methods
    3, iii.
53. Boom, R., Sol, C.J.A., Salimans, M.M.M.,
    Jansen, C.L., Wertheim-Van Dillen, P.M.E.,
    and Van Der Noordaa, J. (1990). Rapid and
    simple method for purification of nucleic
    acids. J. Clin. Microbiol. 28, 495503.
54. Woodard, D.L., Howard, A.J., and Down, J.A.
    (1994). Process for purifying DNA on hydrated
    silica. United States patent US5342931A.
55. Holmberg, R.C., Gindlesperger, A., Stokes, T.,
    Lopez, D., Hyman, L., Freed, M., Belgrader, P.,

* * *

Harvey, J., and Li, Z. (2013). Akonni TruTip
and Qiagen methods for extraction of fetal
circulating DNAevaluation by real-time and
digital PCR. PLoS One 8, e73068.
53\. He, H., Li, R., Chen, Y., Pan, P., Tong, W.,
Dong, X., Chen, Y., and Yu, D. (2017).
Integrated DNA and RNA extraction using
magnetic beads from viral pathogens causing
acute respiratory infections. Sci. Rep. 7,
45199.
54\. Berensmeier, S. (2006). Magnetic particles for
the separation and purification of nucleic
acids. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 73,
495504.
55\. Nargessi, D., and Ou, C. (2010). MagaZorb: a
simple tool for rapid isolation of viral nucleic
acids. J. Infect. Dis. 201, S37S41.
56\. Nargessi, R.D. (2005). Magnetic isolation and
purification of nucleic acids. United States
patent US6855499B1.
57\. Rajendran, V.K., Bakthavathsalam, P.,
Bergquist, P.L., and Sunna, A. (2019). A
portable nucleic acid detection system using
natural convection combined with a
smartphone. Biosens. Bioelectron. 134,
6875.
58\. Kim, Y., Abafogi, A.T., Tran, B.M., Kim, J., Lee,
J., Chen, Z., Bae, P.K., Park, K., Shin, Y., Van
Noort, D., et al. (2020). Integrated microfluidic
preconcentration and nucleic amplification
system for detection of influenza A virus H1N1
in saliva. Micromachines 11, 111.
59\. Zou, Y., Mason, M.G., Wang, Y., Wee, E.,
Turni, C., Blackall, P.J., Trau, M., and Botella,
J.R. (2017). Nucleic acid purification from
plants, animals and microbes in under 30
seconds. PLoS Biol. 15, e2003916.
60\. McFall, S.M., Neto, M.F., Reed, J.L., and
Wagner, R.L. (2016). Filtration isolation of
nucleic acids: a simple and rapid DNA
extraction method. J. Vis. Exp. 114, 16.
61\. Jangam, S.R., Yamada, D.H., McFall, S.M.,
and Kelso, D.M. (2009). Rapid, point-of-care
extraction of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 proviral DNA from whole blood for
detection by real-time PCR. J. Clin. Microbiol.
47, 23632368.
62\. Lange, V., Arndt, K., Schwarzelt, C., Boehme,
I., Giani, A.S., Schmidt, A.H., Ehninger, G.,
and Wassmuth, R. (2014). High density FTA
plates serve as efficient long-term sample
storage for HLA genotyping. Tissue Antigens
83, 101105.
63\. Liang, X., Chigerwe, M., Hietala, S.K., and
Crossley, B.M. (2014). Evaluation of fast
technology analysis (FTA) cards as an
improved method for specimen collection
and shipment targeting viruses associated
with bovine respiratory disease complex.
J. Virol. Methods 202, 6972.
64\. Liu, C., Geva, E., Mauk, M., Qiu, X., Abrams,
W.R., Malamud, D., Curtis, K., Owen, S.M.,
and Bau, H.H. (2011). An isothermal
amplification reactor with an integrated
isolation membrane for point-of-care
detection of infectious diseases. Analyst 136,
2069.
65\. Lee, J.-G., Cheong, K.H., Huh, N., Kim, S.,
Choi, J.-W., and Ko, C. (2006). Microchip-

detection of nucleic acids. Biomed.
Microdevices 12, 705719.
79\. Nunez-Bajo, E., Kasimatis, M., Cotur, Y.,
Asfour, T., Collins, A., Tanriverdi, U., Grell, M.,
Kaisti, M., Senesi, G., Stevenson, K., et al.
(2020). Ultra-low-cost integrated siliconbased transducer for on-site, genetic
detection of pathogens. bioRxiv. [https://doi](https://doi/).
org/10.1101/2020.03.23.002931.
80\. Noh, J.Y., Yoon, S.-W., Kim, D.-J., Lee, M.-S.,
Kim, J.-H., Na, W., Song, D., Jeong, D.G., and
Kim, H.K. (2017). Simultaneous detection of
severe acute respiratory syndrome, Middle
East respiratory syndrome, and related bat
coronaviruses by real-time reverse
transcription PCR. Arch. Virol. 162, 16171623.
81\. Kelly, M.S., Smieja, M., Luinstra, K., Wirth,
K.E., Goldfarb, D.M., Steenhoff, A.P., Arscott-
Mills, T., Cunningham, C.K., Boiditswe, S.,
Sethomo, W., et al. (2015). Association of
respiratory viruses with outcomes of severe
childhood pneumonia in Botswana. PLoS One
10, [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone).
0126593.
82\. Alwine, J.C., Kemp, D.J., and Stark, G.R.
(1977). Method for detection of specific RNAs
in agarose gels by transfer to
diazobenzyloxymethyl-paper and
hybridization with DNA probes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A 74, 53505354.
83\. Streit, S., Michalski, C.W., Erkan, M., Kleeff, J.,
and Friess, H. (2009). Northern blot analysis
for detection and quantification of RNA in
pancreatic cancer cells and tissues. Nat.
Protoc. 4, 3743.
84\. Yu, X.F., Pan, J.C., Ye, R., Xiang, H.Q., Kou, Y.,
and Huang, Z.C. (2008). Preparation of
armored RNA as a control for multiplex realtime reverse transcription-PCR detection of
influenza virus and severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus. J. Clin. Microbiol. 46,
837841.
85\. Corman, V.M., Eckerle, I., Bleicker, T., Zaki, A.,
Landt, O., Eschbach-Bludau, M., van
Boheemen, S., Gopal, R., Ballhause, M.,
Bestebroer, T.M., et al. (2012). Detection of a
novel human coronavirus by real-time
reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Eurosurveillance 17., [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.2807/ese.17.39.20285-en
86\. Kim, M.N., Ko, Y.J., Seong, M.W., Kim, J.S.,
Shin, B.M., and Sung, H. (2016). Analytical and
clinical validation of six commercial middle
east respiratory syndrome coronavirus RNA
detection kits based on real-Time reverse-
Transcription PCR. Ann. Lab. Med. 36,
450456.
87\. Lu, X., Whitaker, B., Kumar, S., Sakthivel, K.,
Kamili, S., Rose, L.E., Lowe, L., Mohareb, E.,
Elassal, E.M., Al-Sanouri, T., et al. (2014). Realtime reverse transcription-PCR assay panel for
Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus. J. Clin. Microbiol. 52, 6775.
88\. Slomka, M.J., Pavlidis, T., Coward, V.J.,
Voermans, J., Koch, G., Hanna, A., Banks, J.,
and Brown, I.H. (2009). Validated RealTime
reverse transcriptase PCR methods for the
diagnosis and pathotyping of Eurasian H7
avian influenza viruses. Influenza Other Respi.
Viruses 3, 151164.

based one step DNA extraction and real-time
PCR in one chamber for rapid pathogen
identification. Lab Chip 6, 886.

66. Kim, J., Johnson, M., Hill, P., and Gale, B.K.
    (2009). Microfluidic sample preparation: cell
    lysis and nucleic acid purification. Integr. Biol.
    1, 574.

67. Azimi, S.M., Nixon, G., Ahern, J., and
    Balachandran, W. (2011). A magnetic beadbased DNA extraction and purification
    microfluidic device. Microfluid. Nanofluidics
    11, 157165.

68. Yamada, K., Shibata, H., Suzuki, K., and
    Citterio, D. (2017). Toward practical
    application of paper-based microfluidics for
    medical diagnostics: state-of-the-art and
    challenges. Lab Chip 17, 12061249.

69. Hu, J., Wang, S., Wang, L., Li, F., Pingguan-
    Murphy, B., Lu, T.J., and Xu, F. (2014).
    Advances in paper-based point-of-care
    diagnostics. Biosens. Bioelectron. 54,

71. Liu, S., Su, W., and Ding, X. (2016). A review on
    microfluidic paper-based analytical devices
    for glucose detection. Sensors 16, 2086.

72. Aid, T., Kaljurand, M., and Vaher, M. (2015).
    Colorimetric determination of total phenolic
    contents in ionic liquid extracts by paper
    microzones and digital camera. Anal.
    Methods 7, 31933199.

73. Cate, D.M., Dungchai, W., Cunningham, J.C.,
    Volckens, J., and Henry, C.S. (2013). Simple,
    distance-based measurement for paper
    analytical devices. Lab Chip 13, 2397.

74. Easley, C.J., Karlinsey, J.M., Bienvenue, J.M.,
    Legendre, L.A., Roper, M.G., Feldman, S.H.,
    Hughes, M.A., Hewlett, E.L., Merkel, T.J.,
    Ferrance, J.P., et al. (2006). A fully integrated
    microfluidic genetic analysis system with
    sample-in-answer-out capability. Proc. Natl.
    Acad. Sci. U S A 103, 1927219277.

75. Tang, R.H., Yang, H., Choi, J.R., Gong, Y.,

76. Chen, Z., Mauk, M.G., Wang, J., Abrams,
    W.R., Corstjens, P.L.A.M., Niedbala, R.S.,
    Malamud, D., and Bau, H.H. (2007). A
    microfluidic system for saliva-based detection
    of infectious diseases. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.
    1098, 429436.

77. Chen, D., Mauk, M., Qiu, X., Liu, C., Kim, J.,
    Ramprasad, S., Ongagna, S., Abrams, W.R.,
    Malamud, D., Corstjens, P.L.A.M., et al. (2010).
    An integrated, self-contained microfluidic
    cassette for isolation, amplification, and

78. Choi, J.R., Tang, R., Wang, S., Wan Abas,
    W.A.B., Pingguan-Murphy, B., and Xu, F.
    (2015). Paper-based sample-to-answer
    molecular diagnostic platform for point-ofcare diagnostics. Biosens. Bioelectron. 74,


* * *

89. Corman, V.M., Rasche, A., Baronti, C.,
    Aldabbagh, S., Cadar, D., Reusken, C.B.E.M.,
    Pas, S.D., Goorhuis, A., Schinkel, J.,
    Molenkamp, R., et al. (2016). Assay
    optimization for molecular detection of Zika
    virus. Bull. World Health Organ. 94, 880892.
90. Landry, M.L., and St George, K. (2017).
    Laboratory diagnosis of zika virus infection.
    Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 141, 6067.
91. Silva, S.J.R.da, Paiva, M.H.S., Guedes, D.R.D.,
    Krokovsky, L., Melo, F.L.de, Silva, M.A.L., da
    Silva, A., da Ayres, C.F.J., and Pena, L.J.
    (2019). Development and validation of reverse
    transcription loop-mediated isothermal
    amplification (RT-LAMP) for rapid detection of
    ZIKV in mosquito samples from Brazil. Sci.
    Rep. 9, 4494.
92. Wu, J.T., Leung, K., and Leung, G.M. (2020).
    Nowcasting and forecasting the potential
    domestic and international spread of the 2019-
    nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a
    modelling study. Lancet 395, 689697.
93. Chu, D.K.W., Pan, Y., Cheng, S.M.S., Hui,
    K.P.Y., Krishnan, P., Liu, Y., Ng, D.Y.M., Wan,
    C.K.C., Yang, P., Wang, Q., et al. (2020).
    Molecular diagnosis of a novel coronavirus
    (2019-nCoV) causing an outbreak of
    pneumonia. Clin. Chem. 555, 549555.
94. Geldert, A., Kenry, and Lim, C.T. (2017).
    Paper-based MoS2 nanosheet-mediated
    FRET aptasensor for rapid malaria diagnosis.
    Sci. Rep. 7, 17510.
95. COVID-19 real-time rRT-PCR panel primers
    and probes. [https://www.cdc.gov/corona](https://www.cdc.gov/corona)
    virus/2019-ncov/lab/rt-pcr-panel-primerprobes.html.
96. Chan, J.F.-W., Yip, C.C.-Y., To, K.K.-W., Tang,
    T.H.-C., Wong, S.C.-Y., Leung, K.-H., Fung,
    A.Y.-F., Ng, A.C.-K., Zou, Z., Tsoi, H.-W., et al.
    (2020). Improved molecular diagnosis of
    COVID-19 by the novel, highly sensitive and
    specific COVID-19-RdRp/hel real-time
    reverse transcription-PCR assay validated
    in vitro and with clinical specimens. J. Clin.
    Microbiol. 58, [https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM).
    00310-20.
97. Oriero, E.C., Jacobs, J., van Geertruyden, J.P.,
    Nwakanma, D., and Dalessandro, U. (2015).
    Molecular-based isothermal tests for field
    diagnosis of malaria and their potential
    contribution to malaria elimination.
    J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 70, 213.
98. Zhao, Y., Chen, F., Li, Q., Wang, L., and Fan, C.
    (2015). Isothermal amplification of nucleic
    acids. Chem. Rev. 115, 1249112545.
99. Tro¤ ger, V., Niemann, K., Ga¤ rtig, C., and
    Kuhlmeier, D. (2015). Isothermal amplification
    and quantification of nucleic acids and its use
    in microsystems. J. Nanomed. Nanotechnol.
    6, [https://doi.org/10.4172/2157-7439](https://doi.org/10.4172/2157-7439).
101. Notomi, T., Okayama, H., Masubuchi, H.,
    Yonekawa, T., Watanabe, K., Amino, N., and
    Hase, T. (2000). Loop-mediated isothermal
    amplification of DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 28,
103. Nagamine, K., Hase, T., and Notomi, T. (2002).
    Accelerated reaction by loop-mediated
    isothermal amplification using loop primers.
    Mol. Cell. Probes 16, 223229.

using a reverse transcriptional loop-mediated
isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP)
diagnostic platform. Clin. Chem. [https://doi](https://doi/).
org/10.1093/clinchem/hvaa102.
115\. Piepenburg, O., Williams, C.H., Stemple, D.L.,
and Armes, N.A. (2006). DNA detection using
recombination proteins. PLoS Biol 4, 1115
1121.
116\. Lobato, I.M., and OSullivan, C.K. (2018).
Recombinase polymerase amplification:
basics, applications and recent advances.
TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 98, 1935.
117\. Lutz, S., Weber, P., Focke, M., Faltin, B.,
Hoffmann, J., Mu¤ ller, C., Mark, D., Roth, G.,
Munday, P., Armes, N., et al. (2010).
Microfluidic lab-on-a-foil for nucleic acid
analysis based on isothermal recombinase
polymerase amplification (RPA). Lab Chip 10,
887893.
118\. Tsaloglou, M.N., Watson, R.J., Rushworth,
C.M., Zhao, Y., Niu, X., Sutton, J.M., and
Morgan, H. (2015). Real-time microfluidic
recombinase polymerase amplification for the
toxin B gene of Clostridium difficile on a
SlipChip platform. Analyst 140, 258264.
119\. Xia, S., and Chen, X. (2020). Single-copy
sensitive, field-deployable, and simultaneous
dual-gene detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA via
modified RTRPA. Cell Discov. 6,37.
120\. Mahalanabis, M., Do, J., ALMuayad, H.,
Zhang, J.Y., and Klapperich, C.M. (2010). An
integrated disposable device for DNA
extraction and helicase dependent
amplification. Biomed. Microdevices 12,
353359.
121\. Qian, J., Ferguson, T.M., Shinde, D.N.,
Ramı·rez-Borrero, A.J., Hintze, A., Adami, C.,
and Niemz, A. (2012). Sequence dependence
of isothermal DNA amplification via EXPAR.
Nucleic Acids Res. 40, [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
1093/nar/gks230.
122\. Compton, J. (1991). Nucleic acid sequencebased amplification. Nature 350, 9192.
123\. Bo¤ hmer, A., Schildgen, V., Lu¤ sebrink, J.,
Ziegler, S., Tillmann, R.L., Kleines, M., and
Schildgen, O. (2009). Novel application for
isothermal nucleic acid sequence-based
amplification (NASBA). J. Virol. Methods 158,
199201.
124\. Rodriguez, N.M., Linnes, J.C., Fan, A.,
Ellenson, C.K., Pollock, N.R., and Klapperich,
C.M. (2015). Paper-based RNA extraction,
in situ isothermal amplification, and lateral
flow detection for low-cost, rapid diagnosis of
influenza A (H1N1) from clinical specimens.
Anal. Chem. 87, 78727879.
125\. Seok, Y., Jang, H., Oh, J., Joung, H.-A., and
Kim, M.-G. (2019). A handheld lateral flow
strip for rapid DNA extraction from
staphylococcus aureus cell spiked in various
samples. Biomed. Phys. Eng. Express 5,
035035.
126\. COVID-19 Testing, Public Health Ontario.
[https://www.publichealthontario.ca/en/](https://www.publichealthontario.ca/en/)
laboratory-services/test-information-index/
wuhan-novel-coronavirus.
127\. Tinafar, A., Zhou, Y., Hong, F., Swingle, K.L.,
Tang, A.A., Green, A.A., and Pardee, K. (2020).
Cell-free biosensors: synthetic biology

102. Parida, M., Posadas, G., Inoue, S., Hasebe, F.,
     and Morita, K. (2004). Real-time reverse
     transcription loop-mediated isothermal
     amplification for rapid detection of west nile
     virus. J. Clin. Microbiol. 42, 257263.

103. Yang, W., Dang, X., Wang, Q., Xu, M., Zhao,
     Q., Zhou, Y., Zhao, H., Wang, L., Xu1, Y.,
     Wang, J., et al. (2020). Rapid detection of
     SARS-CoV-2 using reverse transcription RT-
     LAMP method. medRxiv. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
     1101/2020.03.02.20030130.

104. Tran, D.H., Cuong, H.Q., Tran, H.T., Le, U.P.,
     Do, H.D.K., Bui, L.M., Hai, N.D., Linh, H.T.,
     Thao, N.T.T., Anh, N.H., et al. (2020). A
     comparative study of isothermal nucleic acid
     amplification methods for SARS-CoV-2
     detection at point of care. bioRxiv. https://
     doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.24.113423.

105. Kashir, J., and Yaqinuddin, A. (2020). Loop
     mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP)
     assays as a rapid diagnostic for COVID-19.
     Med. Hypotheses 141, 109786.

106. Curtis, K.A., Rudolph, D.L., and Owen, S.M.
     (2008). Rapid detection of HIV-1 by reversetranscription, loop-mediated isothermal
     amplification (RT-LAMP). J. Virol. Methods
     151, 264270.

107. Zhang, N., Wang, L., Deng, X., Liang, R., Su,
     M., He, C., Hu, L., Su, Y., Ren, J., Yu, F., et al.
     (2020). Recent advances in the detection of
     respiratory virus infection in humans. J. Med.
     Virol. 92, 408417.

108. El-Tholoth, M., Bau, H.H., and Song, J. (2020).
     A single and two-stage, closed-tube,
     molecular test for the 2019 novel coronavirus
     (COVID-19) at home, clinic, and points of
     entry. ChemRxiv. [https://doi.org/10.26434/](https://doi.org/10.26434/)
     chemrxiv.11860137.v1.

109. Lin, X., Wu, M., Wang, W., Gao, Y., Zhang, W.,

110. Lin, X., Wu, M., Wang, W., Gao, Y., Zhang, W.,
     Wu, D., Wu, Y., Zhou, X., and Li, G. (2019).
     Visual detection of Zika virus by isothermal
     nucleic acid amplification combined with a
     lateral-flow device. Anal. Methods 11, 1795

112. Yu, L., Wu, S., Hao, X., Dong, X., Mao, L.,
     Pelechano, V., Chen, W.-H., and Yin, X. (2020).
     Rapid detection of COVID-19 coronavirus without borders. In Handbook of Cell
     Biosensors, G. Thouand, ed. (Springer
     International Publishing), pp. 139.

113. Shen, M., Zhou, Y., Ye, J., Abdullah AL-maskri,
     A.A., Kang, Y., Zeng, S., and Cai, S. (2020).
     Recent advances and perspectives of nucleic
     acid detection for coronavirus. J. Pharm. Anal.
     10, 97101.

114. Pardee, K., Green, A.A., Takahashi, M.K.,
     Braff, D., Lambert, G., Lee, J.W., Ferrante, T.,
     Ma, D., Donghia, N., Fan, M., et al. (2016).
     Rapid, low-cost detection of zika virus using
     programmable biomolecular components.
     Cell 165, 12551266.

115. Rao, A., Goldstein, D.Y., Wolk, D.M., and
     Wolf, L.A. (2020). Development and
     Evaluation of Two SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR
     Laboratory Developed Tests on the ARIES
     ORF1ab HKU-N. [https://www.captoday](https://www.captoday/)
     online.com/LuminexSARSCoV219.pdf.

116. Tripodi, A., Mancuso, M.E., Chantarangkul, V.,
     Clerici, M., Bader, R., Meroni, P.L.,
     Santagostino, E., and Mannuci, P.M. (2005).
     Lupus anticoagulants and their relationship
     with the inhibitors against coagulation factor
     VIII: considerations on the differentiation
     between the 2 circulating anticoagulants.
     Clin. Chem. 51, 18831885.

117. Gootenberg, J.S., Abudayyeh, O.O., Lee,
     J.W., Essletzbichler, P., Dy, A.J., Joung, J.,
     Verdine, V., Donghia, N., Daringer, N.M.,
     Freije, C.A., et al. (2017). Nucleic acid
     detection with CRISPR-Cas13a/C2c2. Science
     356, 438442.

118. East-Seletsky, A., OConnell, M.R., Knight,
     S.C., Burstein, D., Cate, J.H.D., Tjian, R., and
     Doudna, J.A. (2016). Two distinct RNase
     activities of CRISPR-C2c2 enable guide-RNA
     processing and RNA detection. Nature 538,

120. Kellner, M.J., Koob, J.G., Gootenberg, J.S.,
     Abudayyeh, O.O., and Zhang, F. (2019).
     SHERLOCK: nucleic acid detection with
     CRISPR nucleases. Nat. Protoc. 14, 29863012.

121. Hou, T., Zeng, W., Yang, M., Chen, W., Ren, L.,
     Ai, J., Wu, J., Liao, Y., Gou, X., Li, Y., et al.
     (2020). Development and evaluation of A
     CRISPR-based diagnostic for 2019-novel
     coronavirus. medRxiv. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
     1101/2020.02.22.20025460.

122. Zhang, F., Abudayyeh, O.O., and
     Gootenberg, J.S. (2020). A protocol for
     detection of COVID-19 using CRISPR
     diagnostics. [https://www.broadinstitute.org/](https://www.broadinstitute.org/)
     files/publications/special/COVID-19
     detection (updated).pdf.

123. Ding, X., Yin, K., Li, Z., and Liu, C. (2020). All-in-
     One dual CRISPR-cas12a (AIOD-CRISPR)
     assay: a case for rapid, ultrasensitive and
     visual detection of novel coronavirus SARS-
     CoV-2 and HIV virus. bioRxiv. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
     10.1101/2020.03.19.998724.

124. Guo, L., Sun, X., Wang, X., Liang, C., Jiang, H.,
     Gao, Q., Dai, M., Qu, B., Fang, S., Mao, Y.,
     et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 detection with
     CRISPR diagnostics. Cell Discov 6,34.

125. Yang, Y., Chen, Y., Tang, H., Zong, N., and
     Jiang, X. (2019). Microfluidics for biomedical
     analysis. Small Methods 4, [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
     1002/smtd.201900451.

126. Vashist, S.K., Luppa, P.B., Yeo, L.Y., Ozcan, A., 154. Esteban-Ferna· ndez De A· vila, B., Araque, E.,
     and Luong, J.H.T. (2015). Emerging
     technologies for next-generation point-ofcare testing. Trends Biotechnol. 33, 692705.

127. Shen, M., Zhou, Y., Ye, J., Abdullah AL-maskri,

128. Kim, J., Biondi, M.J., Feld, J.J., and Chan,
     Recent advances and perspectives of nucleic W.C.W. (2016). Clinical validation of Quantum
     acid detection for coronavirus. J. Pharm. Anal. dot barcode diagnostic technology. ACS
     Nano 10, 47424753.

129. Woo, S.M., Gabardo, C.M., and Soleymani, L.

130. Wikramaratna, P., Paton, R.S., Ghafari, M., and
     Braff, D., Lambert, G., Lee, J.W., Ferrante, T., Lourenco, J. (2020). Estimating false-negative
     detection rate of SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR.
     medRxiv. [https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05).

132. Wang, J., Xu, D., Kawde, A.N., and Polsky, R.

133. Chen, Y., Qian, C., Liu, C., Shen, H., Wang, Z.,
     Ping, J., Wu, J., and Chen, H. (2020). Nucleic
     acid amplification free biosensors for
     pathogen detection. Biosens. Bioelectron.
     153, 112049.

134. Ren, Y., Deng, H., Shen, W., and Gao, Z.

135. Prabowo, B.A., Wang, R.Y.L., Secario, M.K.,
     Ou, P.-T., Alom, A., Liu, J.-J., and Liu, K.-C.

136. Tripodi, A., Mancuso, M.E., Chantarangkul, V.,
     (2017). Rapid detection and quantification of
     Enterovirus 71 by a portable surface plasmon
     resonance biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron.
     92, 186191. 158. Faria, H.A.M., and Zucolotto, V. (2019). Labelwith the inhibitors against coagulation factor

137. Ochmann, S.E., Vietz, C., Trofymchuk, K.,
     Acuna, G.P., Lalkens, B., and Tinnefeld, P.
     (2017). Optical nanoantenna for single
     molecule-based detection of zika virus 159. Manzano, M., Viezzi, S., Mazerat, S., Marks,
     Nucleic Acids Without Molecular
     Multiplication. Anal. Chem. 89, 1300013007.

138. Negri, P., Choi, J.Y., Jones, C., Tompkins,
     detection with CRISPR-Cas13a/C2c2. Science S.M., Tripp, R.A., and Dluhy, R.A. (2014).
     Identification of virulence determinants in 160. Yang, Y., Huang, Y., and Li, C. (2019). A
     influenza viruses. Anal. Chem. 86, 69116917.
     S.C., Burstein, D., Cate, J.H.D., Tjian, R., and

139. Malik, Y.S., Verma, A.K., Kumar, N., Touil, N.,
     Karthik, K., Tiwari, R., Bora, D.P., Dhama, K.,
     activities of CRISPR-C2c2 enable guide-RNA
     Ghosh, S., Hemida, M.G., et al. (2019).
     Advances in diagnostic approaches for viral 161. Lai, R.Y., Lagally, E.T., Lee, S.-H., Soh, H.T.,
     etiologies of diarrhea: from the lab to the
     field. Front. Microbiol. 10, 118, [https://doi](https://doi/).
     org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.01957.

140. R.H. Liu, and A.P. Lee, eds. (2007). Integrated
     CRISPR nucleases. Nat. Protoc. 14, 29863012.
     Biochips for DNA Analysis (Springer).

141. Hou, T., Zeng, W., Yang, M., Chen, W., Ren, L., 162. Adkins, J., Boehle, K., and Henry, C. (2015).

142. Kim, Y.T., Lee, D., Heo, H.Y., Sim, J.E., Woo,
     K.M., Kim, D.H., Im, S.G., and Seo, T.S. (2016).
     Total integrated slidable and valveless solid
     phase extraction-polymerase chain reaction-163. Zhao, C., and Liu, X. (2016). A portable papercapillary electrophoresis microdevice for mini Y
     chromosome short tandem repeat
     genotyping. Biosens. Bioelectron. 78, 489496.

143. Liepold, P., Wieder, H., Hillebrandt, H.,
     diagnostics. [https://www.broadinstitute.org/](https://www.broadinstitute.org/) Friebel, A., and Hartwich, G. (2005). DNAarrays with electrical detection: a label-free 164. Li, X., and Liu, X. (2016). A microfluidic paperlow cost technology for routine use in life
     sciences and diagnostics.

144. Ding, X., Yin, K., Li, Z., and Liu, C. (2020). All-in-Bioelectrochemistry 67, 143150.

145. Ferapontova, E.E. (2018). DNA 165. Karnaushenko, D., Ibarlucea, B., Lee, S., Lin,
     electrochemistry and electrochemical sensors
     CoV-2 and HIV virus. bioRxiv. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/) for nucleic acids. Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 11,

147. Guo, L., Sun, X., Wang, X., Liang, C., Jiang, H., 152. Trotter, M., Borst, N., Thewes, R., and von
     Stetten, F. (2020). Review: electrochemical
     DNA sensing principles, commercial 166. Tang, X., Bansaruntip, S., Nakayama, N.,
     systems, and applications. Biosens.
     Bioelectron. 154, 112069.
     Jiang, X. (2019). Microfluidics for biomedical 153. Wei, F., Lillehoj, P.B., and Ho, C. (2010). DNA

148. Esteban-Ferna· ndez De A· vila, B., Araque, E.,
     Campuzano, S., Pedrero, M., Dalkiran, B.,
     Barderas, R., Villalonga, R., Kilic‚ , E., and
     Pingarro· n, J.M. (2015). Dual functional
     graphene derivative-based electrochemical
     platforms for detection of the TP53 gene with
     single nucleotide polymorphism selectivity in
     biological samples. Anal. Chem. 87, 22902298.

149. Woo, S.M., Gabardo, C.M., and Soleymani, L.
     (2014). Prototyping of wrinkled nano-/
     microstructured electrodes for
     electrochemical DNA detection. Anal. Chem.
     86, 1234112347.

150. Wang, J., Xu, D., Kawde, A.N., and Polsky, R.
     (2001). Metal nanoparticle-based
     electrochemical stripping potentiometric
     detection of DNA hybridization. Anal. Chem.
     73, 55765581.

151. Ren, Y., Deng, H., Shen, W., and Gao, Z.
     (2013). A highly sensitive and selective
     electrochemical biosensor for direct
     detection of microRNAs in serum. Anal.
     Chem. 85, 47844789.

152. Faria, H.A.M., and Zucolotto, V. (2019). Labelfree electrochemical DNA biosensor for zika
     virus identification. Biosens. Bioelectron. 131,

154. Manzano, M., Viezzi, S., Mazerat, S., Marks,
     R.S., and Vidic, J. (2018). Rapid and label-free
     electrochemical DNA biosensor for detecting
     hepatitis A virus. Biosens. Bioelectron. 100,

156. Yang, Y., Huang, Y., and Li, C. (2019). A
     reusable electrochemical sensor for one-step
     biosensing in complex media using triplexforming oligonucleotide coupled DNA
     nanostructure. Anal. Chim. Acta 1055, 9097.

157. Lai, R.Y., Lagally, E.T., Lee, S.-H., Soh, H.T.,
     Plaxco, K.W., and Heeger, A.J. (2006). Rapid,
     sequence-specific detection of unpurified
     PCR amplicons via a reusable,
     electrochemical sensor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
     USA103, 40174021.

158. Adkins, J., Boehle, K., and Henry, C. (2015).
     Electrochemical paper-based microfluidic
     devices. Electrophoresis 36, 18111824.

159. Zhao, C., and Liu, X. (2016). A portable paperbased microfluidic platform for multiplexed
     electrochemical detection of human
     immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus
     antibodies in serum. Biomicrofluidics 10,

161. Li, X., and Liu, X. (2016). A microfluidic paperbased origami nanobiosensor for label-free,
     ultrasensitive immunoassays. Adv. Healthc.
     Mater. 5, 13261335.

162. Karnaushenko, D., Ibarlucea, B., Lee, S., Lin,
     G., Baraban, L., Pregl, S., Melzer, M., Makarov,
     D., Weber, W.M., Mikolajick, T., et al. (2015).
     Light weight and flexible high-performance
     diagnostic platform. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 4,

164. Tang, X., Bansaruntip, S., Nakayama, N.,
     Yenilmez, E., Chang, Y.I., and Wang, Q. (2006).
     Carbon nanotube DNA sensor and sensing
     mechanism. Nano Lett. 6, 16321636.

165. Zhan, B., Li, C., Yang, J., Jenkins, G., Huang,
     W., and Dong, X. (2014). Graphene field-effect

166. Wei, F., Lillehoj, P.B., and Ho, C. (2010). DNA
     Diagnostics : nanotechnology-enhanced
     electrochemical. Pediatr. Res. 67, 458468.


* * *

transistor and its application for electronic
sensing. Small 10, 40424065.

182. Gosert, R., Naegele, K., and Hirsch, H.H. 195. Stumpf, F., Schwemmer, F., Hutzenlaub, T.,
     (2019). Comparing the Cobas Liat Influenza A/

transistor and its application for electronic 182. Gosert, R., Naegele, K., and Hirsch, H.H. 195. Stumpf, F., Schwemmer, F., Hutzenlaub, T.,
sensing. Small 10, 40424065. (2019). Comparing the Cobas Liat Influenza A/
B and respiratory syncytial virus assay with
168\. Lee, D.W., Lee, J., Sohn, I.Y., Kim, B.Y., Son, multiplex nucleic acid testing. J. Med. Virol.

168. Lee, D.W., Lee, J., Sohn, I.Y., Kim, B.Y., Son,
     Y.M., Bark, H., Jung, J., Choi, M., Kim, T.H.,
     Lee, C., et al. (2015). Field-effect transistor
     with a chemically synthesized MoS2 sensing

multiplex nucleic acid testing. J. Med. Virol.
91, 582587.
183\. Melchers, W.J.G., Kuijpers, J., Sickler, J.J., and

Lee, C., et al. (2015). Field-effect transistor
with a chemically synthesized MoS2 sensing 183. Melchers, W.J.G., Kuijpers, J., Sickler, J.J., and
channel for label-free and highly sensitive Rahamat-Langendoen, J. (2017). Lab-in-a-tube:
electrical detection of DNA hybridization. real-time molecular point-of-care diagnostics

electrical detection of DNA hybridization.
Nano Res. 8, 23402350.
169\. Gu¤ l, O.T., Pugliese, K.M., Choi, Y., Sims, P.C.,
Pan, D., Rajapakse, A.J., Weiss, G.A., and

real-time molecular point-of-care diagnostics
for influenza A and B using the cobas Liat 196. Reboud, J., Xu, G., Garrett, A., Adriko, M.,
system. J. Med. Virol. 89, 13821386.
184\. Poljak, M., Korva, M., Knap Gasper, N., Fujs

Pan, D., Rajapakse, A.J., Weiss, G.A., and 184. Poljak, M., Korva, M., Knap Gasper, N., Fujs
Collins, P.G. (2016). Single molecule Komlos, K., Sagadin, M., Ursic, T., Avsic
bioelectronics and their application to Zupanc, T., and Petrovec, M. (2020). Clinical
amplification-free measurement of DNA evaluation of the cobas SARS-CoV-2 test and

bioelectronics and their application to
amplification-free measurement of DNA
lengths. Biosensors 6,29.
170\. Hajian, R., Balderston, S., Tran, T., deBoer, T.,
Etienne, J., Sandhu, M., Wauford, N.A., Chung,
J.Y., Nokes, J., Athaiya, M., et al. (2019).
Detection of unamplified target genes via

evaluation of the cobas SARS-CoV-2 test and
a diagnostic platform switch during 48 hours
in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. 197. Pardee, K., Slomovic, S., Nguyen, P.Q., Lee,
J. Clin. Microbiol. 58, e00599-20.
185\. da Silva, S.J.R., Pardee, K., and Pena, L. (2020).
Loop-mediated isothermal amplification

Detection of unamplified target genes via Loop-mediated isothermal amplification
CRISPRCas9 immobilized on a graphene field-(LAMP) for the diagnosis of zika virus: a review.
Viruses 12, [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/)

CRISPRCas9 immobilized on a graphene fieldeffect transistor. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 427437.

(LAMP) for the diagnosis of zika virus: a review.
Viruses 12, [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/) 198\. Shin, D.J., Trick, A.Y., Hsieh, Y.-H., Thomas,
v12010019.

effect transistor. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 427437. 198. Shin, D.J., Trick, A.Y., Hsieh, Y.-H., Thomas,
v12010019.
171\. Ying, Y.-L., Zhang, J., Gao, R., and Long, Y.-T.
186\. Nguyen, T., Duong Bang, D., and Wolff, A.
(2013). Nanopore-based sequencing and
(2020). 2019 novel coronavirus disease

(2013). Nanopore-based sequencing and
detection of nucleic acids. Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed. 52, 1315413161.
172\. Moscona, R., Ram, D., Wax, M., Bucris, E.,
Levy, I., Mendelson, E., and Mor, O. (2017).

186. Nguyen, T., Duong Bang, D., and Wolff, A.
     (2020). 2019 novel coronavirus disease
     (COVID-19): paving the road for rapid
     detection and point-of-care diagnostics. 199. Priye, A., Wong, S., Bi, Y., Carpio, M., Chang, J.,
     Micromachines 11, 306.
187. Vashist, S.K. (2020). In vitro diagnostic assays

Levy, I., Mendelson, E., and Mor, O. (2017).
187\. Vashist, S.K. (2020). In vitro diagnostic assays
Comparison between next-generation and
for COVID-19: recent advances and emerging
Sanger-based sequencing for the detection
trends. Diagnostics 10, 202.
of transmitted drug-resistance mutations

of transmitted drug-resistance mutations
among recently infected HIV-1 patients in
Israel, 2000-2014. J. Int. AIDS Soc. 20, 21846.

trends. Diagnostics 10, 202.
188\. Smith, E.J., Xi, W., Makarov, D., Mo¤ nch, I.,
200\. Hossain, A., Reis, A.C., Rahman, S., and Salis,
Harazim, S., Bolanos Quinones, V.A., Schmidt,

Israel, 2000-2014. J. Int. AIDS Soc. 20, 21846. 200. Hossain, A., Reis, A.C., Rahman, S., and Salis,
Harazim, S., Bolanos Quinones, V.A., Schmidt,
C.K., Mei, Y., Sanchez, S., and Schmidt, O.G.
173\. Lowe, C.F., Merrick, L., Harrigan, P.R.,
(2012). Lab-in-a-tube: ultracompact
Mazzulli, T., Sherlock, C.H., and Ritchie, G. components for on-chip capture and

Mazzulli, T., Sherlock, C.H., and Ritchie, G.
(2016). Implementation of next-generation
sequencing for hepatitis B resistance testing
and genotyping in a clinical microbiology
laboratory. J. Clin. Microbiol. 54, 127133.

(2012). Lab-in-a-tube: ultracompact
components for on-chip capture and
detection of individual micro-/
nanoorganisms. Lab Chip 12, 19171931.
189\. Priye, A., Bird, S.W., Light, Y.K., Ball, C.S.,
Negrete, O.A., and Meagher, R.J. (2017). A 201. Gibson, J., Schechter-Perkins, E.M., Mitchell,

Negrete, O.A., and Meagher, R.J. (2017). A 201. Gibson, J., Schechter-Perkins, E.M., Mitchell,
174\. Wanunu, M. (2012). Nanopores: a journey smartphone-based diagnostic platform for

174. Wanunu, M. (2012). Nanopores: a journey
     towards DNA sequencing. Phys. Life Rev. 9,
176. Howorka, S. (2017). Building membrane
     nanopores. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 619630.

smartphone-based diagnostic platform for
rapid detection of Zika, chikungunya, and
dengue viruses. Sci. Rep. 7, 44778.
190\. Udugama, B., Kadhiresan, P., Samarakoon, A.,
and Chan, W.C.W. (2017). Simplifying assays
202\. Foudeh, A.M., Fatanat Didar, T., Veres, T., and

nanopores. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 619630. and Chan, W.C.W. (2017). Simplifying assays
by tableting reagents. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 202. Foudeh, A.M., Fatanat Didar, T., Veres, T., and
176\. Nanopore sequencing the SARS-CoV-2 1734117349.
genome: introduction to protocol. https://

genome: introduction to protocol. https://
nanoporetech.com/resource-centre/
nanopore-sequencing-sars-cov-2-genomeintroduction-protocol.

191. Lu, W., Wang, J., Wu, Q., Sun, J., Chen, Y.,
     Zhang, L., Zheng, C., Gao, W., Liu, Y., and
     Jiang, X. (2016). High-throughput sample-toanswer detection of DNA/RNA in crude 203. Zhang, L., Ding, B., Chen, Q., Feng, Q., Lin, L.,

answer detection of DNA/RNA in crude 203. Zhang, L., Ding, B., Chen, Q., Feng, Q., Lin, L.,
177\. Liu, R., Fu, A., Deng, Z., Li, Y., and Liu, T. samples within functionalized micro-pipette

177. Liu, R., Fu, A., Deng, Z., Li, Y., and Liu, T.
     (2020). Promising methods for detection of
     novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. View 1, 25.
178. Oxford Nanopore Technologies. https://

samples within functionalized micro-pipette
tips. Biosens. Bioelectron. 75, 2833.
192\. Zhang, L., Zhang, Y., Wang, C., Feng, Q., Fan,
F., Zhang, G., Kang, X., Qin, X., Sun, J., Li, Y., 204. Nasseri, B., Neda, S., Rabieec, N., Kalbasid,

178. Oxford Nanopore Technologies. https:// F., Zhang, G., Kang, X., Qin, X., Sun, J., Li, Y., 204. Nasseri, B., Neda, S., Rabieec, N., Kalbasid,
     nanoporetech.com/. et al. (2014). Integrated microcapillary for
     sample-to-answer nucleic acid pretreatment,

179. SARS-CoV-2 (Severe Acute Respiratory amplification, and detection. Anal. Chem. 86,

180. SARS-CoV-2 (Severe Acute Respiratory
     Syndrome Coronavirus 2) Sequences. https://
     [www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/sars-cov-2-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/sars-cov-2-)


sample-to-answer nucleic acid pretreatment,
amplification, and detection. Anal. Chem. 86,
1046110466.

[www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/sars-cov-2-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/sars-cov-2-)
seqs/. 193. Shen, K.M., Sabbavarapu, N.M., Fu, C.Y., Jan, 205. Dou, M., Macias, N., Shen, F., Dien Bard, J.,
J.T., Wang, J.R., Hung, S.C., and Lee, G. Bin
180\. Minervini, C.F., Cumbo, C., Orsini, P., Anelli, (2019). An integrated microfluidic system for

180. Minervini, C.F., Cumbo, C., Orsini, P., Anelli,
     L., Zagaria, A., Specchia, G., and Albano, F.
     (2020). Nanopore sequencing in blood

(2019). An integrated microfluidic system for
rapid detection and multiple subtyping of
influenza A viruses by using glycan-coated

(2020). Nanopore sequencing in blood influenza A viruses by using glycan-coated
diseases: a wide range of opportunities. magnetic beads and RT-PCR. Lab Chip 19,
Front. Genet. 11,76. 12771286. 206. Wang, R., Zhao, R., Li, Y., Kong, W., Guo, X.,

181. Nehra, A., Ahlawat, S., and Singh, K.P. (2019). 194. Song, J., Mauk, M.G., Hackett, B.A., Cherry,
     A biosensing expedition of nanopore: a S., Bau, H.H., and Liu, C. (2016). Instrumentreview. Sensors Actuators, B Chem. 284, free point-of-care molecular detection of zika

182. virus. Anal. Chem. 88, 72897294.

183. Stumpf, F., Schwemmer, F., Hutzenlaub, T.,
     Baumann, D., Strohmeier, O., Dingemanns,
     G., Simons, G., Sager, C., Plobner, L., Von
     Stetten, F., et al. (2016). LabDisk with
     complete reagent prestorage for sample-toanswer nucleic acid based detection of
     respiratory pathogens verified with influenza
     A H3N2 virus. Lab Chip 16, 199207.

184. Reboud, J., Xu, G., Garrett, A., Adriko, M.,
     Yang, Z., Tukahebwa, E.M., Rowell, C., and
     Cooper, J.M. (2019). Paper-based
     microfluidics for DNA diagnostics of malaria
     in low resource underserved rural
     communities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 116,

186. Pardee, K., Slomovic, S., Nguyen, P.Q., Lee,
     J.W., Donghia, N., Burrill, D., Ferrante, T.,
     McSorley, F.R., Furuta, Y., Vernet, A., et al.
     (2016). Portable, on-demand biomolecular
     manufacturing. Cell 167, 248259.e12.

187. Shin, D.J., Trick, A.Y., Hsieh, Y.-H., Thomas,
     D.L., and Wang, T.-H. (2018). Sample-to-
     Answer droplet magnetofluidic platform for
     point-of-care hepatitis C viral load
     quantitation. Sci. Rep. 8, 9793.

188. Priye, A., Wong, S., Bi, Y., Carpio, M., Chang, J.,
     Coen, M., Cope, D., Harris, J., Johnson, J.,
     Keller, A., et al. (2016). Lab-on-a-Drone: toward
     pinpoint deployment of smartphone-enabled
     nucleic acid-based diagnostics for mobile
     health care. Anal. Chem. 88, 46514660.

189. Hossain, A., Reis, A.C., Rahman, S., and Salis,
     H.M. (2020). A Massively Parallel COVID-19
     Diagnostic Assay for Simultaneous Testing of
     19200 Patient Samples, 17. [https://docs](https://docs/).
     google.com/document/d/1kP2w\_uTMSep
     2UxTCOnUhh1TMCjWvHEY0sUUpkJHPYV4/
     edit.

190. Gibson, J., Schechter-Perkins, E.M., Mitchell,
     P., Mace, S., Tian, Y., Williams, K., Luo, R., and
     Yen-Lieberman, B. (2017). Multi-center
     evaluation of the cobas Liat Influenza A/B
     & RSV assay for rapid point of care diagnosis.
     J. Clin. Virol. 95, 59.

191. Foudeh, A.M., Fatanat Didar, T., Veres, T., and
     Tabrizian, M. (2012). Microfluidic designs and
     techniques using lab-on-a-chip devices for
     pathogen detection for point-of-care
     diagnostics. Lab Chip 12, 32493266.

192. Zhang, L., Ding, B., Chen, Q., Feng, Q., Lin, L.,
     and Sun, J. (2017). Point-of-care-testing of
     nucleic acids by microfluidics. TrAC Trends
     Anal. Chem. 94, 106116.

193. Nasseri, B., Neda, S., Rabieec, N., Kalbasid,
     A., Karimie, M., and Hamblin, M.R. (2018).
     Point-of-care microfluidic devices for
     pathogen detection. Biosens. Bioelectron.
     117, 112128.

194. Dou, M., Macias, N., Shen, F., Dien Bard, J.,
     Domı·nguez, D.C., and Li, X.J. (2019). Rapid
     and accurate diagnosis of the respiratory
     disease pertussis on a point-of-care biochip.
     EClinicalMedicine 8, 7277.

195. Wang, R., Zhao, R., Li, Y., Kong, W., Guo, X.,
     Yang, Y., Wu, F., Liu, W., Song, H., and Hao, R.
     (2018). Rapid detection of multiple respiratory
     viruses based on microfluidic isothermal
     amplification and a real-time colorimetric
     method. Lab Chip 18, 35073515.


* * *

207. Sun, F., Ganguli, A., Nguyen, J., Brisbin, R.,
     Shanmugam, K., Hirschberg, D.L., Wheeler,
     M.B., Bashir, R., Nash, D.M., and Cunningham,
     B.T. (2020). Smartphone-based multiplex 30-
     minute nucleic acid test of live virus from nasal
     swab extract. Lab Chip 20, 16211627.
208. Wei, X., Zhou, W., Sanjay, S.T., Zhang, J., Jin,
     Q., Xu, F., Dominguez, D.C., and Li, X. (2018).
     Multiplexed instrument-free bar-chart
     SpinChip integrated with nanoparticlemediated magnetic aptasensors for visual
     quantitative detection of multiple pathogens.
     Anal. Chem. 90, 98889896.
209. Qin, P., Park, M., Alfson, K.J., Tamhankar, M.,
     Carrion, R., Patterson, J.L., Griffiths, A., He, Q.,
     Yildiz, A., Mathies, R., et al. (2019). Rapid and
     fully microfluidic Ebola virus detection with
     CRISPR-cas13a. ACS Sensors 4, 10481054.
210. Gorkin, R., Park, J., Siegrist, J., Amasia, M.,
     Lee, B.S., Park, J.M., Kim, J., Kim, H., Madou,
     M., and Cho, Y.K. (2010). Centrifugal
     microfluidics for biomedical applications. Lab
     Chip 10, 17581773.
211. Kong, L.X., Perebikovsky, A., Moebius, J.,
     Kulinsky, L., and Madou, M. (2016). Lab-on-a-
     CD: a fully integrated molecular diagnostic
     system. J. Lab. Autom. 21, 323355.
212. State Funds the Development of Rapid Tests
     for Coronavirus - Hahn-Schickard. https://
     [www.hahn-schickard.de/en/news-detail/6-](http://www.hahn-schickard.de/en/news-detail/6-)
     millionen-landesfoerderung-fuer-coronaschnelltest.
213. Ye, X., Li, L., Li, J., Wu, X., Fang, X., and Kong,
     J. (2019). Microfluidic-CFPA chip for the pointof-care detection of african swine fever virus
     with a median time to threshold in about
     10 min. ACS Sensors 4, 30663071.
214. Hosseini, S., Aeinehvand, M.M., Uddin, S.M.,
     Benzina, A., Rothan, H.A., Yusof, R., Koole,
     L.H., Madou, M.J., Djordjevic, I., and Ibrahim,
     F. (2015). Microsphere integrated microfluidic
     disk: synergy of two techniques for rapid and
     ultrasensitive dengue detection. Sci. Rep. 5,
216. Yetisen, A.K., Akram, M.S., and Lowe, C.R.
     (2013). Paper-based microfluidic point-of-care
     diagnostic devices. Lab Chip 13, 22102251.
217. Ozer, T., McMahon, C., and Henry, C.S. (2020).
     Advances in paper-based analytical devices.
     Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. (Palo Alto Calif) 13,
     [https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-anchem-](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-anchem-)
     061318-114845.
218. Batule, B.S., Seok, Y., and Kim, M.G. (2020).
     Paper-based nucleic acid testing system for
     simple and early diagnosis of mosquito-borne
     RNA viruses from human serum. Biosens.
     Bioelectron. 151, 111998.
219. Pardee, K., Green, A.A., Ferrante, T.,
     Cameron, D.E., Daleykeyser, A., Yin, P., and
     Collins, J.J. (2014). Paper-based synthetic
     gene networks. Cell 159, 940954.

molecular diagnostics. Lab Chip 11, 2686
2692.
231\. Cepheid \| Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 Has
Received FDA Emergency Use Authorization.
[https://www.cepheid.com/coronavirus](https://www.cepheid.com/coronavirus).
232\. Xu, G., Hsieh, T.M., Lee, D.Y.S., Ali, E.M., Xie,
H., Looi, X.L., Koay, E.S.C., Li, M.H., and Ying,
J.Y. (2010). A self-contained all-in-one
cartridge for sample preparation and realtime PCR in rapid influenza diagnosis. Lab
Chip 10, 31033111.
233\. Li, S.Y., Cheng, Q.X., Li, X.Y., Zhang, Z.L., Gao,
S., Cao, R.B., Zhao, G.P., Wang, J., and Wang,
J.M. (2018). CRISPR-Cas12a-assisted nucleic
acid detection. Cell Discov. 4, 1821.
234\. Chen, J.S., Ma, E., Harrington, L.B., Da Costa,
M., Tian, X., Palefsky, J.M., and Doudna, J.A.
(2018). CRISPR-Cas12a target binding
unleashes indiscriminate single-stranded
DNase activity. Science 360, 436439.
235\. Azhar, M., Phutela, R., Ansari, A.H., Sinha, D.,
Sharma, N., Kumar, M., Aich, M., Sharma, S.,
Rauthan, R., Singhal, K., et al. (2020). Rapid,
field-deployable nucleobase detection and
identification using FnCas9. bioRxiv. https://
doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.028167.
236\. Ai, J.W., Zhang, Y., Zhang, H.C., Xu, T., and
Zhang, W.H. (2020). Era of molecular
diagnosis for pathogen identification of
unexplained pneumonia, lessons to be
learned. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 9, 597600.
237\. Basu, A., Zinger, T., Inglima, K., Woo, K., Atie,
O., Yurasits, L., See, B., and Aguero-
Rosenfeld, M.E. (2020). Performance of the
rapid Nucleic Acid Amplification by Abbott ID
NOW COVID-19 in nasopharyngeal swabs
transported in viral media and dry nasal
swabs, in a New York City academic
institution. bioRxiv. [https://doi.org/10.1101/](https://doi.org/10.1101/)
2020.05.11.089896.
238\. Ganguli, A., Mostafa, A., Berger, J., Aydin, M.,
Sun, F., Valera, E., Cunningham, B.T., King,
W.P., and Bashir, R. (2020). Rapid isothermal
amplification and portable detection system
for SARS-CoV-2. bioRxiv. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
1101/2020.05.21.108381.
239\. Patel, R., Babady, E., Theel, E.S., Storch, G.A.,
Pinsky, B.A., St George, K., Smith, T.C., and
Bertuzzi, S. (2020). Report from the American
society for microbiology COVID-19
international summit, 23 march 2020: value of
diagnostic testing for SARSCoV-2/COVID-
19\. MBio 11, e00722-20.
240\. van Dorp, L., Acman, M., Richard, D., Shaw,
L.P., Ford, C.E., Ormond, L., Owen, C.J.,
Pang, J., Tan, C.C.S., Boshier, F.A.T., et al.
(2020). Emergence of genomic diversity and
recurrent mutations in SARS-CoV-2. Infect.
Genet. Evol. 104351.

219. Lee, H.H., Dineva, M.A., Chua, Y.L., Ritchie,
     A.V., Ushiro-Lumb, I., and Wisniewski, C.A.
     (2010). Simple amplification-based assay: a
     nucleic acidbased point-of-care platform for
     HIV-1 testing. J. Infect. Dis. 201, S65S72.

220. Takahashi, M.K., Tan, X., Dy, A.J., Braff, D.,
     Akana, R.T., Furuta, Y., Donghia, N.,
     Ananthakrishnan, A., and Collins, J.J. (2018). A
     low-cost paper-based synthetic biology
     platform for analyzing gut microbiota and
     host biomarkers. Nat. Commun. 9, 3347.

221. Fu, E., and Downs, C. (2017). Progress in the
     development and integration of fluid flow
     control tools in paper microfluidics. Lab Chip
     17, 614628.

222. Choi, J.R., Yong, K.W., Tang, R., Gong, Y.,
     Wen, T., Li, F., Pingguan-Murphy, B., Bai, D.,
     and Xu, F. (2017). Advances and challenges of
     fully integrated paper-based point-of-care
     nucleic acid testing. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem.
     93, 3750.

223. Govindaraju, S., Lee, M.H., and Yun, K. (2019).
     Recent trends in the development of paperbased diagnostic chips for the detection of
     human viruses. In Recent Developments in
     Applied Microbiology and Biochemistry, V.
     Buddola, ed. (Elsevier), pp. 349361.

224. Rodriguez, N.M., Wong, W.S., Liu, L., Dewar,
     R., and Klapperich, C.M. (2016). A fully
     integrated paperfluidic molecular diagnostic
     chip for the extraction, amplification, and
     detection of nucleic acids from clinical
     samples. Lab Chip 16, 753763.

225. Rauch, J.N., Valois, E., Solley, S.C., Braig, F.,
     Lach, R.S., Baxter, N.J., Kosik, K.S., Arias, C.,
     Acosta-Alvear, D., and Wilson, M.Z. (2020). A
     scalable, easy-to-deploy, protocol for cas13-
     based detection of SARS-CoV-2 genetic
     material. bioRxiv. [https://doi.org/10.1101/](https://doi.org/10.1101/)
     2020.04.20.052159.

226. Fraumeni, P. (2020). U of T researchers lab-ina-box promises to boost COVID-19 testing
     capacity. [https://www.utoronto.ca/news/u-tresearcher-s-lab-box-promises-boost-covid-](https://www.utoronto.ca/news/u-tresearcher-s-lab-box-promises-boost-covid-)
     19-testing-capacity.

227. Canada Funds Development of COVID-19

228. Canada Funds Development of COVID-19
     Lab-in-a-box. [https://toronto.citynews.ca/](https://toronto.citynews.ca/)
     2020/03/07/canada-covid-19-lab/.

229. Green, A.A., Silver, P.A., Collins, J.J., and Yin,
     P. (2014). Toehold switches: de-novodesigned regulators of gene expression. Cell
     159, 925939.

230. Liu, C., Mauk, M.G., Hart, R., Qiu, X., and Bau,
     H.H. (2011). A self-heating cartridge for


* * *

Matter, Volume 3

# Supplemental Information

# Fighting COVID-19: Integrated Micro- and Nanosystems for Viral Infection Diagnostics

Zhen Qin, Ran Peng, Ilina Kolker Baravik, and Xinyu Liu

* * *

Supplementary Information:

Table S1 Commercial COVID-19 RNA detection systems approved by FDA and Health Canada (accessed on May 27, 2020)

| No. | Products | Micro/Nano technique | Sample treatment (lysis and extraction) | Nucleic acid amplification | Detection signal | LOD | Assay time | Multiplexing | Highlights |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | BioFire COVID-19 Test, BioFire (US) | Lab-in-a-Cartridge(Pouch format with nest array spots) | Lysis by agitation.Extract and purify by magnetic beads. | Multiplex PCR | Endpoint melting curve | 330 copies/mL | 45 minutes | No. One patient sample per device(pouch) | Work with high-throughput BioFire FilmArray Torch System.Two step injection for sample and hydrogen solution.Reagents pre-loaded and freeze-dried inside the pouch.Realize three independent and non-overlapping assays targeting two SARS-Cov-2 open reading frame sequences(ORF1ab and ORF8).Clinical performance:100% PPA for 30 samples and100% NPA for 66 samples.No cross reaction to six close viruses. |
| 2 | ID NOW platform, Realtime SARS-Cov-2 assay,Abbot (US) | Lab-in-a-Box(Cartridge) | Elution and lysis in sample receiver using buffer.Transfer cartridge manually to test base, comprising two sealed reaction tubes with each containing a lyophilized reagent pellet. | Isothermal amplification | Fluorescence intensity | 125 copies/mL | 5~13 minutes | No. One patient sample per device(cartridge) | Lightweight(6.6 pounds)和 portable(the size of a small toaster), suitable for POC settings.Predicted inclusivity of100% for COVID-19 tests.No significant combined homologies with human genome and other coronaviruses.Two tubes containing amplification reagents and internal control. |
| 3 | m2000™RealTime SARS-Cov-2 EUA test,Abbot (US) | Lab-in-a-Plate(Sealed Abbott 96-Well Optical Reaction Plate) | Microparticle-based protocol and reagents | real-time RT-PCR | Realtime fluorescence intensity | 100 copies/mL | 24 hours | Yes,24-96 samples per run | Work with m2000™RealTime System.Scalable,automated process up to470 patient samples in24hours.Dual target assay for RdRp和N genes.Primers and probes had100% homology to all the available circulating SARS-Cov-2 sequences.No significant cross-reactivity or microbial interference. |
| 4 | Xpert Xpress SARS-Cov-2 test,Cepheid,(US) | Lab-in-a-Cartridge | Cell lysis by sonication | RT-PCR | Light intensity with LED illuminati on | 250 copies/mL | 45 minutes | No.1 sample per cartridge. | Less than a minute of hands-on time to prepare the sample.Single-use disposable cartridges that hold the RT-PCR reagents and host the RT-PCR process.minimizing the cross-contamination between samples. |
| 5 | Panther Fusion®SARS-Cov-2 Assay,Hologic(US) | Lab-in-a-Tube | Lysis in a specimen transport tube before testing.Purification and Elution based on magnetic separation method. | Multiplex RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt intensity | 1×10-2TCID50mL | 2.4 hours(1150 coronavirus tests in | Yes.Multiple samples with random access feature. | Fully automated system operation and high-throughput system with small footprint.32 assays at a time and up to60 days of onboard reagent stability.Test for SARS-Cov-2 and other common respiratory viruses with similar symptoms.Target two conserved regions of ORF1ab gene of SARS-Cov-2. |

* * *

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 24 hours) |  | • Eluted nucleic acid is transferred to a Panther Fusion reaction tube which contains oil and reconstituted mastermix reagents. |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 6 | Roche's Cobas SARS-CoV-2 Test, Roche (US) | N/A | Lysis by proteinase and lysis reagent. Purification based on magnetic separation method, followed by elution at elevated temperature. | real-time RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt signal measurement | 0.009 TCID5/μmL | 3 hours(96 results) and 8 hours(384 results) for cobas 6800 system | Yes, Multiple samples per run. | • Work with Cobas 6800/8800 systems, 695/132 installed respectively worldwide. |
| • Fully automated sample preparation followed by PCR amplification and detection in enclosed and high-throughput system, 3-hour manual interaction and up to 8 hours of walk-away time. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| • Amplification targets at ORF 1 a/b non-structural region that is unique to SARS-CoV-2 virus. Require 0.6 mL sample. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 7 | BioGX SARS-CoV-2 Reagents for, Becton, Dickinson (BD)(US) | Lab-on-a-Chip | Nucleic acids are isolated and purified using BD MAX ExK TNA-3 kit from samples in tubes based on magnetic beads separation method. | real-time RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt signal measurement | 40 copies/mL | -hours | Yes, Up to 24 Samples per run. | • Work with fully automated BD MAX™ System. |
| • Amplify the virus nucleocapsid phosphoprotein gene(N1)和N2 genes in microfluidic PCR cartridge. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| • Less than 1.5 mins hands-on time per specimen. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 8 | Accula SARS-CoV-2 Test, Mesa Biotech Inc.(US) | Lab-on-a-Chip(Lateral flow strip in cassette) | Extraction in buffer in a tube without purification. | RT-PCR | Colorimetric test line on strip(blue) | 100 copies | 30 minutes | No, One sample test per run. | • Suitable for POC settings. Use with Accula Dock system, which is affordable, easy to use platform. |
| 9 | ePlex SARS-CoV-2 Test, GemMark Diagnostics, Inc.(US) | Lab-on-a-Chip(Cartridge integrates electrochemical sensor) | Extracted and purified via magnetic solid phase extraction on digital microfluidic chip inside cartridge. | RT-PCR | Electrochemical signal | 1×105copies/mL | 90 minutes | Yes, System support multi-cartridges running although One sample testing per cartridge. | • Work with ePlex system, which automates all aspects of nucleic acid testing including extraction, amplification and detection in a single-use cartridge. |
| • Less than 2 minutes hands-on time. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| • Minimum 200 μL sample required. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 10 | ARIES SARS-CoV-2 Assay, Luminex(US) | Lab-in-a-Cartridge(Cassette) | Lysis, isolation and purification in cassette with magnetic capture particles. | RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt intensity | 7.5×104copies/mL | 2 hours | Yes, One sample per cassette but one system holds up to six cassettes per run. | • Work with ARIES magazine system, high-throughput, scalable and cost-effective option. |
| • One system for 144 tests per day. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 11 | NxTAG CoV Extended | Lab-in-a-Plate | Extract nucleic acids with bioMerieux® easyMAJ®and | Multiplex RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt intensity | 5×103copies/mL | 4 hours | Yes, Up to 96 patient samples can be | • Work with MAGPIX instrument, Target genes are ORF1ab,N and E genes for SARS-CoV-2. |

* * *

|  | Panel plate,Luminex(US) | (Lyophilized bead reagents pre-plated well) | EMAG® Systems utilizing magnetic silica. |  |  |  |  | run in four hours. |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 12 | QIAstat-Dx Respiratory SARS-CoV-2 Panel,QIAGEN GmbH(Germany) | Lab-in-a-Cartridge | Lysis using mechanical method(high speed rotor) and chemical means,purification based on membrane. | RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt intensity | 500 copies/mL | 1 hour | No. One sample per cartridge per test. | Work with QIAstat-Dx Analyzer system.Fully automated assay in the cartridge including sample preparation and assay testing.Less than one-minute hands on time.First syndromic testing solution to be deployed in epidemic can differentiate novel coronavirus from 20 other serious respiratory infections. |
| 13 | NeuMoDxSARS-CoV-2 Assay,NeuMoDxMolecular,Inc.(US) | Lab-on-a-Chip | Lysis with buffer in extraction plate wells,containing dry affinity coated paramagnetic beads and plate heating for lysis and binding of NA to beads. | RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt intensity | 150 copies/mL | 1 hour | Yes.12 individual analytical lanes in microfluidic cartridge. | Work with NeuMoDx™288 Molecular System or NeuMoDx™96 Molecular System.Target on Nsp2-gene FAM and N gene HEX.NeuDry Technology instead of traditional reagents requiring lyophilization. |
| 14 | SimplexaCOVID-19 Direct assay,DiaSorin Molecular LLC(US) | Lab-on-a-Chip | Lyse by high temperature and centrifugation on disc;No RNA extraction required. | RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt intensity | 500 copies/mL | 1 hour | Yes.96 samples in one hour per run. | Work with the LIAISON MDX system.Assay targets at SARS-CoV-2 genome,ORF1ab and S gene.Only use a maximum of10μL reagent. |
| 15 | Spartan CubeCOVID-19 system(CA) | Lab-in-a-Box | N/A | RT-PCR | Fluoresce nt intensity | N/A | 1 hour | No.One sample per test. | Approved by Health Canada. |
| Note:N/A:Information not available;copies/mL:Viral genomic copies per milliliter;TCID50/mL:50% tissue culture infectious dose per milliliter;LOD:Limit of detection;RT-PCR:Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Note: N/A: Information not available; copies/mL: Viral genomic copies per milliliter; TCID50/mL: 50% tissue culture infectious dose per milliliter; LOD: Limit of detection; RT-PCR:

Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.