A Nature Portfolio journal

[https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271-025-00266-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271-025-00266-x)

Psychological, social, and health-related
factors predict risk for financial
exploitation

Check for updates

Yi Yang1, Katherine Hackett2,SrikarKatta3,RitaM.Ludwig4, Johanna Jarcho1, Tania Giovannetti1,
5,6 1,6
Dominic S. Fareri & David V. Smith

People lose tens of billions of dollars a year to financial exploitation in the United States alone. Few
studies have examined how preferences for trust and fairness in economic activities may contribute to
risk for financial exploitation. Furthermore, few studies have examined the interaction between risk
factors. In three studies, we attempt to address these gaps by surveying 1918 (Study 1 = 680, Study
1234567890():,;1234567890():,;
2 = 305, Study 3 = 933) demographically and socioeconomically diverse participants to examine
putative risk factors for self-reported financial exploitation. We focused on: (1) how trust in others and
fairness preferences during economic games are associated with self-reported financial exploitation;
and (2) how sociodemographic and health-related factors interact with psychosocial factors to confer
risk for financial exploitation. We found participants with lower socioeconomic status and poor
emotion regulation skills were at the greatest risk for financial exploitation. We also found associations
between greater risk for financial exploitation and poorer physical health, more severe cognitive
decline, increased persuadability, and increased insensitivity to trustworthiness cues. Our findings
suggest that risk for financial exploitation is dependent upon a combination of psychosocial,
sociodemographic and health factors, which may lead to interventions that protect vulnerable
individuals.

samples of adults.
The first major gap in our understanding of financial exploitation is the
lack of research on social information integration during economic activities
as a risk factor. This gap is particularly important given that about half of
financial exploitation cases are perpetrated by strangers (51%) followed by
2
friends and family (34%), and that the mechanisms underlying susceptibility to exploitation by different types of perpetrators may differ14.These
findings suggest that people’s social information integration regarding trust
in others and fairness preferences may play an important role in shaping
victims’ economic decisions. Economic games used in studies of behavioral
16
economics (e.g., Ultimatum Game15;theTrustGame)havehelped
advance understanding of social information integration during financial
17–19
decision making in the laboratory. The Ultimatum Game assesses preferences for fairness by proposing fair and unfair monetary offers to
participants and measuring their acceptance and rejection rates dependent
on offer type. Fairness preferences have been shown to be associated with
contract choice. Employees who are more concerned with fairness tend to
choose a bonus contract which offers non-binding bonus payment if their
performance is satisfactory20, which may make people vulnerable to
financial exploitation (e.g., accepting a performance-based financial promise that cannot be enforced by a third party and becoming exploited if the
performance-based bonus is not fulfilled). The Trust Game assesses trust in
others by recording the amount of money one decides to invest in another
person given subjective expectation of reciprocation. Differing levels of
baseline interpersonal trust may relate to individuals’ likelihood of falling
prey to bad-faith actors. Despite their potential association with financial
exploitation risk, the Ultimatum Game and the Trust Game have rarely been
studied alongside risk factors for financial exploitation.
The second major gap is in studying whether interactions among

studied alongside risk factors for financial exploitation.
The second major gap is in studying whether interactions among
multiple factors contribute to the likelihood of financial exploitation. In
the real world, individuals have a constellation of background experiences and existing attributes that affect their decision-making. We posit
that noted inconsistencies in the existing literature results from studying
risk factors in isolation, rather than evaluating their interaction. For
21,22 2,23,24
example, worse physical health and worse cognitive functioning
have been consistently associated with higher risk for financial exploi-
25,26 27,28
tation. However, socioeconomic status (SES), trust in others,
27,30
emotion regulation29, and social support have been contradictory.
6,31
Results from research on age effects also did not show that older
people are particularly more vulnerable to financial exploitation, contrary
to both popular and scientific opinions. One possible explanation for
these inconsistent observations of a single risk factor’s relationship with
financial exploitation might be its potential interaction(s) with other risk
factors. While there exists an abundance of research on single factors, in
contrast, only a handful of studies have touched upon interactions
26,32,33
between two or more of them. Although previous work has identified associations between risk for financial exploitation, sociodemographic factors, health, and psychosocial factors, it remains unclear
whether these variables interact to predict risk for financial exploitation.
Given that previous work has largely focused on single factors that
contribute to risk of financial exploitation, our primary goal was to assess
how risk for financial exploitation was moderated by other factors. We
specifically focused on how sociodemographic factors (e.g., socioeconomic status, age, etc.) and health-related factors may moderate
psychological factors such as psychosocial functionings (e.g., trust in
others, fairness preference, persuadability, need to belong, and emotion
regulation). Such “sociodemographics vs health” (Study 1 & 2) and
“sociodemographic vs psychosocial functioning” (Study 1, 2 & 3) combinations allows for a relatively more comprehensive and holistic
approach to examine financial exploitation risk factors, integrating both
external (sociodemographic and health-related factors) and internal
(psychological) factors. This approach acknowledges the complex, multifaceted nature of financial exploitation vulnerability.
Neglecting to examine trust in others and fairness preference during

To quantify the risk for financial exploitation, we employed the Older
Adult Financial Exploitation Measure (OAFEM1, all three studies). OAFEM
is a 30-item scale that measures key behaviors related to older adults’
financial exploitation. Each item maps on one of five financial exploitation
concept groups (i.e., Abuse of Trust, Financial Entitlement, Coercion, Signs
of Possible Abuse, and Theft & Scams. See Table S9 for item mapping). One

of the five concept groups is “Abuse of Trust” with eight items mapped on to
it. Several items that are not mapped on “Abuse of Trust” may also relate to
trust in others, such as the “Theft & Scam” item “Has someone overcharged
you for work or services that were done poorly or never done?” Although
OAFEM concept mapping does not have a group directly related to fairness
preference, we argue that several items may nevertheless relate to fairness
preference. For example, for people who have answered “Yes” to the “Theft
&Scam” item “Has someone taken your money to do something for you but
never did?”, they may have regarded it was fair to the perpetrator to use the
money to do a certain thing and therefore allowed the perpetrator to take
their money.
We also adopted the Short Form of Financial Exploitation Vulner-

We also adopted the Short Form of Financial Exploitation Vulnerability Scale (FEVS-SF14)asanadditionalmeasureofriskforfinancial
exploitation (Study 3 only). The FEVS-SF is a nine-item scale that probes
contextual features of the environment in which a person is making a
financial decision. Unlike the OAFEM, items in the FEVS-SF are not
mapped onto specific concept groups by its developers. However, several of
the items may still relate to trust and fairness preference (Table S10). For
example, people who rated higher on the item “How often do you wish you
had someone to talk to about financial decisions, transactions, or plans?”
maybemorelikelytotrustfinancial advice from other people, including
unsolicited ones from scammers. For fairness preference, people who rated
higher on the item “How often do you feel anxious about your financial
decisions and/or transactions?” may be anxious about being treated unfairly
when making financial decisions and fall prey to scammers who offer
ostensibly fair deals or ostensibly unfair deals that are allegedly more
advantageous to the victim.
We conducted three studies to address the gaps of (1) neglecting to

advantageous to the victim.
We conducted three studies to address the gaps of (1) neglecting to
examine trust in others and fairness preference during economic games
as financial exploitation risk factors, and (2) neglecting to examine
interactions between different risk factors, which might have contributed
to inconsistent findings in the literature. First, given the focus on older
adults in previous financial exploitation research31, in Study 1 we focused
on risk factors of financial exploitation within older adults from our local
community in Philadelphia, PA, USA. We used the 30-item OAFEM1
that measures key behaviors related to older adults’ financial exploitation.
Our primary goals were to identify (1) how trust in others and fairness
preference across social context in economic activities may be associated
with self-reported financial exploitation, and (2) how the association
between individual socioeconomic status and self-reported financial
exploitation may be moderated by health-related and psychosocial factors. In Study 2, we sought to replicate our findings from Study 1 in a
more diversified population within the Pennsylvania region, USA.
Building off findings of interactions between socioeconomic status and
several psychosocial factors from Study 1 and Study 2, whose cohorts
included only older people from the Philadelphia metropolitan area and
Pennsylvania region and lacked diversity in terms of race (majority
White), in Study 3 we expanded our sample’s age range, racial diversity,
and geographical range, and examined how sociodemographic and
health-related factors may moderate the association between psychosocial factors and financial exploitation. Age and geographical location
have been related to idiosyncrasies in experiences related to financial
34–36
exploitation, such as prevalence and types of scams. Therefore, given
the increased sample diversity in age and geographical range, besides
measuring financial exploitation related behaviors using OAFEM, we
also employed the FEVS-SF14, which focuses on contextual information
of the environment in which a person is making a financial decision and
allows us to detect contextual risk of financial exploitation. Using three
studies and three different cohorts, we investigated a range of risk factor
domains including trust in others and fairness preference during economic games, sociodemographics, health-related factors, and psychosocial factors. We believe our findings contribute to a more comprehensive
and reliable understanding of financial exploitation risk, and hope that
insights can be used to guide healthcare, governmental and financial
industries in combating financial exploitation.

* * *

Methods
Data collection, procedure, and analyses for all studies

Data collection, procedure, and analyses for all studies
All data were collected using Qualtrics panels. The surveys were sent to

All data were collected using Qualtrics panels. The surveys were sent to
participants based on their eligibility and the targeted sociodemographic
brackets of each study. Data from participants who failed Qualtrics’ internal
quality check (e.g., anyone completing in less than half of the median
completion time of the “soft launch” during which 10% of the target sample
sizewascollectedforQualtrics’ reviewing purposes) and attention checks
(e.g., asking participants to “select the ‘strongly disagree’”) were excluded
from a study directly by Qualtrics prior to data transfer. In each specific
analysis we also excluded participants whose data needed for the analysis
was not collected due to Qualtrics technical error (see Tables S1–S8 for
sample size and measure summary of each analysis). We aimed at an even
split on certain demographic factors and discussed our goals and criteria
when setting up each panel study with Qualtrics. However, due to real-life
constraints (e.g., difficulty in recruiting non-White racial minorities),
Qualtrics was only able to recruit samples as we reported in the manuscript.
Qualtrics was not able to achieve these goals, resulting in an uneven split for
some factors.
All participants provided informed consent and were paid by Qualtrics

All participants provided informed consent and were paid by Qualtrics
for completing a survey. All studies were approved by Temple University’s
Institutional Review Board.
All regression analyses across studies were conducted using iteratively

Institutional Review Board.
All regression analyses across studies were conducted using iteratively
reweighted least-squares robust regression models with Huber weights to
compute the coefficient of single factor and interaction effects of our
interests. The robust regression approach deviated from our pre-registered
analysis plan of using ordinary linear squares (Study 1) and two-way
ANOVAs (Study 2 & 3). This deviation was motivated by several factors.
First, our key financial exploitation measure (OAFEM) was zero-inflated
with extreme outliers, and various tests commonly violated the normality
and homoscedasticity assumptions required for ANOVA. Moreover, discretizing a continuous variable into medians would have imposed relatively
arbitrary cut-offs, hindering cross-study comparability and complicating
interpretation. Robust regression allowed us to downweight the influence of
outliers while preserving the continuous nature of our measures, thereby
providing a better fit to the majority of the data.
We included age, gender, race, and education as control variables in all

We included age, gender, race, and education as control variables in all
studies when they were not among our primary factors of interest in an
analysis (e.g., when an analysis involved socioeconomic status, education
was not included as a control variable since education was a component of
our socioeconomic status composite score). Although this approach deviates from our pre-registration, where we only planned to control for age, we
believe it increases rigor and facilitates comparisons with other studies
25,37
examining financial exploitation.
For multiple-comparison correction, we adopted the approach in

believe it increases rigor and facilitates comparisons with other studies
25,37
examining financial exploitation.
For multiple-comparison correction, we adopted the approach in
Derringer38. This is another deviation from our pre-registration of using
Bonferroni correction. We made the decision to accommodate the nonindependence among our measures and tests. The approach in Derringer38
takes into account such non-independence when adjusting for multiple
comparisons, offering a more reasonable balance between false positive vs
false negative findings compared to the Bonferroni correction, which would
be too stringent for our studies, especially given our studies’ exploratory
nature.

assumptions were likely violated due to extreme skewness and excess zeros
43
(Delacre et al.). Similarly, Welch’s ANOVA does not assume equal variances across groups, making it robust to heteroscedasticity43.Formaltests
for normality or homogeneity of variances were therefore unnecessary for
these methods.

Deviations from Pre-registrations
There were several deviations from the preregistrations across the studies,

Deviations from Pre-registrations
There were several deviations from the preregistrations across the studies,
including the exclusion of certain pre-registered hypotheses, changes to
planned analyses, adjustments to multiple-comparison correction methods,
and the inclusion of unregistered interaction analyses. These deviations
were made to address methodological challenges, maintain consistency
across studies, and ensure the robustness of our findings. A detailed summary of deviations, along with their corresponding reasons, is provided in
Table 5. We also provided mappings of the reported results to the preregistered hypotheses and corresponding results using the originally planned analyses for each study in Tables S11–S22 in the supplementary
materials.

Study 1 - Risk factors in an older adult sample from Philadelphia
metropolitan area
Given the focus on older adults in previous financial exploitation research31,

Given the focus on older adults in previous financial exploitation research31,
we first focused on risk factors of financial exploitation within older adults
from our local community in Philadelphia, PA, USA. Our primary goals
were to identify (1) how trust in others and fairness preference across social
context in economic activities may be associated with self-reported financial
exploitation, and (2) how the association between socioeconomic status and
self-reported financial exploitation may be moderated by health-related and
psychosocial factors.

Participants. A sample of local older adults was recruited using Qualtrics
panels. Participants were eligible to enroll in the study if they were 50
years of age or older and currently lived in the Philadelphia Metropolitan
Area. The participants were recruited to be evenly split across brackets of
household income ($0–50,000; $51,000K–100,000; $101,000 and above),
gender (men, women), and education (no degree; college degree; master’s
degree or above). The final sample included 680 participants. The
majority of participants identified as women (57.35%), White (81.18%),
and not-Hispanic (96.62%), and ranged in age from 50 to 91 years
(M = 62.48) (Table 1).

Materials. Questionnaires and scales of sociodemographics, financial
exploitation, health, economic decisions across social contexts, persuadability, insensitivity to trustworthiness cues, need to belong, perceived social support, and emotion regulation were presented to
participants. See Tables for summaries of sociodemographic
(Tables 1–3), health-related (Table 4), and psychosocial measures
(Table 4). The survey also included several questions and scales that were
not intended for the current study and are not reported here. Participants’
average total time to complete the survey was 33.32 min.

* * *

Table 1 \| Study time, geographical range, and participant demographics

|  |  | Study 1 |  | Study 2 |  | Study 3 |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Data collection time |  | 2/4-2/29,2020 |  | 4/16-5/21,2020 |  | 7/12-9/10,2021 |  |
| Population |  | Philadelphia Metropolitan Area adults of age 50 or above |  | Pennsylvania Region adults of age 50 or above |  | The United States adults of age 20 or above |  |
| Size |  | 680 |  | 305 |  | 844 |  |
| Age |  | 62.48(7.89) |  | 61.78(7.95) |  | 48.06(19.57) |  |
|  |  | Count | Percentage | Count | Percentage | Count | Percentage |
| Gender | Male | 289 | 42.50% | 120 | 39.34% | 417 | 49.41% |
| Female | 390 | 57.35% | 185 | 60.66% | 427 | 50.59% |  |
| Non-binary | 1 | 0.15% | 0 | 0.00% | 0 | 0.00% |  |
| Race | American Indian or Alaska Native | 6 | 0.88% | 2 | 0.66% | 38 | 4.50% |
| Asian | 9 | 1.32% | 4 | 1.31% | 74 | 8.77% |  |
| Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander | 1 | 0.15% | 0 | 0.00% | 5 | 0.59% |  |
| White | 552 | 81.18% | 259 | 84.92% | 449 | 53.20% |  |
| More than one race | 19 | 2.79% | 10 | 3.28% | 79 | 9.36% |  |
| Black or African American | 93 | 13.68% | 30 | 9.84% | 199 | 23.58% |  |
| Ethnicity | Hispanic or Latino | 23 | 3.38% | 13 | 4.26% | 78 | 9.24% |
| Not Hispanic or Latino | 657 | 96.62% | 292 | 95.74% | 766 | 90.76% |  |

using a three-point scale (0 = “No”,1=“Suspected”,2=“Yes”). The final
OAFEM score is a severity-weighted sum across all 30 items (Entitlement
Expectation = 1; Lesser Theft & Scams = 2; Major Theft & Scams = 3). The
weighted sum of rated items is used as the total score. Total scores range
from 0 to 124 and higher scores reflect higher risk for financial exploitation.
OAFEM was originally developed as a self-report measure conducted by an
interviewer. In our online study we used OAFEM as a pure participantdriven self-report measure and modified the question prompt accordingly
(i.e., “Please select an answer for each question. All questions refer to the past
12 months, including the present.”). In addition, due to time constraints and
the self-report nature of the survey the subject in each question was referred
to in general terms (i.e., “someone”).

Trust in others and fairness preference. To assess participants’ trust in
others and fairness preference in economic activities, we used hypothetical questions from the Trust Game16 and the Ultimatum Game15,
respectively. We included six items from the Ultimatum Game. Each
item asks if the participant would accept or reject an offer from a stranger
who shares a proportion of a certain amount of money with the participant (e.g., “Consider the following scenario. Let’s imagine Jordan is
given $35, but Jordan has to share some of the $35 with you. Jordan offers
you $7. If you accept Jordan’s offer, you get $7 and Jordan gets $28. If you
reject Jordan’s offer, neither of you get any money. Accept or Reject?”).
The offer in each item varies across the task in terms of fairness (e.g., an
offer of 48%–50% split of the money to the participant was coded as fair,
whereas offers of less than 25% to the participant were coded as unfair).
There were four unfair items and two fair items. We also included four
items from the Trust game. Each item asks how much money a participant would invest for a prospective higher return with a person who
could choose to either split the multiplied amount evenly (reciprocate) or
retain it for themselves (defect) (e.g., “Consider the following scenario.
You are given $23. You can keep all of this money or share some of it
with Charlie, a stranger you haven’t met. Whatever you share with
Charlie will be tripled. Importantly, Charlie can keep all of the tripled
sum of money to himself or share the tripled sum of money evenly with
you. How much would you like to share with Charlie?”). The person was
either a hypothetical friend in two of the items or a hypothetical stranger
44
in the other two items (adopted from Fareri et al.). Participants were
asked to indicate how much in dollars they would share with the other
person (e.g., how much out of $28. The maximum amount varied

between $22, $23, $27, and $28 across four items). We used the amount
of money shared with others as an indicator of participants’ trust in the
other person.

from 0 to 124 and higher scores reflect higher risk for financial exploitation. Health-related indicators. To assess health, we adopted the physical health
OAFEM was originally developed as a self-report measure conducted by an and mental health subscales from PROMIS global items45 as measures of
interviewer. In our online study we used OAFEM as a pure participant-physical health and mental health. We also adopted the Everyday Cognition
driven self-report measure and modified the question prompt accordingly Scaleasourmeasureofeverydaycognitivefunctioning.
(i.e., “Please select an answer for each question. All questions refer to the past Physical and Mental Health Summary Scores46. This scale assesses

47
Everyday Cognition Scale (Ecog). This scale is a 12-item global measure of perceived decline of everyday cognitive abilities. The items ask about
participants’ performance in different domains of everyday function by
asking them to compare how they function now compared to 10 years ago
(e.g., “Remembering where you have placed objects.”). Participants can
indicate their performance by choosing from a four-point scale (1 = better
or no change; 2 = a little worse sometimes; 3 = a little worse all the time;
4 = much worse; there is also a “don’tknow” option which was coded as
missing data). Ecog was initially developed as an informant-rated tool to
measure cognitive decline. Subsequent studies have used it as a self-report
measure of subjective cognitive decline and have demonstrated equivalent if
not improved performance in predicting mild cognitive decline compared
48,49 50
to the informant version (Farias et al.;seeRabinetal. for a review).
Thus, given the self-reported nature of our survey study, we used the 12-item
self-report version of the Ecog as a measure of cognitive decline (e.g., “Please

* * *

Table 2 \| Participant education level and personal and household economic information

|  |  | Study 1 |  |  | Study 2 |  |  | Study 3 |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Count | Percentage | Code for analyses | Count | Percentage | Code for analyses | Count | Percentage | Code for analyses |  |  |
| Education level | Less than high school | 1 | 0.15% | 1 | 1 | 0.3% | 1(<=9年) | 20 | 2.37% | 1 |
| Some high school | 2 | 0.29% | 2 | 8 | 2.6% | 2(9-11 years) |  |  |  |  |
| High school diploma/GED | 114 | 16.76% | 3 | 71 | 23.3% | 3(12 years) | 406 | 48.10% | 2 |  |
| Some college (technical school, college, university) | 143 | 21.03% | 4 | 22 | 7.2% | 4(13 years) |  |  |  |  |
| Associate's degree or other professional certification(e.g., medical technician) | 62 | 9.12% | 5 | 63 | 20.7% | 5(14-15 years) |  |  |  |  |
| Bachelor's degree | 198 | 29.12% | 6 | 53 | 17.4% | 6(16 years) | 260 | 30.81% | 3 |  |
| Advanced degree | 160 | 23.53% | 7 | 87 | 28.5% | 7(>=17 years) | 158 | 18.72% | 4 |  |
| Total monthly expenses($) | <=1000 | 67 | 9.9% | 1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 1001-2500 | 238 | 35.0% | 2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 2501-4000 | 183 | 26.9% | 3 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 4001-5500 | 67 | 9.9% | 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 5501-7000 | 58 | 8.5% | 5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 7001-8500 | 13 | 1.9% | 6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| >8500 | 29 | 4.3% | 7 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Not sure | 0 | 0.0% | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Total annual household income($) | <12500 | 31 | 4.6% | 1 |  |  |  | 89 | 10.5% | 1 |
| 12500-18750 | 28 | 4.1% | 2 |  |  |  | 52 | 6.2% | 2 |  |
| 18751-28120 | 54 | 7.9% | 3 |  |  |  | 102 | 12.1% | 3 |  |
| 28121-50000 | 133 | 19.6% | 4 |  |  |  | 168 | 19.9% | 4 |  |
| 50001-63280 | 60 | 8.8% | 5 |  |  |  | 110 | 13.0% | 5 |  |
| 63281-99999 | 149 | 21.9% | 6 |  |  |  | 148 | 17.5% | 6 |  |
| 100000-142380 | 108 | 15.9% | 7 |  |  |  | 108 | 12.8% | 7 |  |
| >142380 | 117 | 17.2% | 8 |  |  |  | 67 | 7.9% | 8 |  |
| Highest annual salary($) | <12500 | 17 | 2.5% | 1 | 40 | 13.1% | 1(<=13k) | 82 | 9.7% | 1 |
| 12500-18750 | 26 | 3.8% | 2 | 16 | 5.2% | 2(13-19k) | 62 | 7.3% | 2 |  |

Table 3 \| Financial exploitation risk measures

| Measure | Literature | Range | Study 1 | Study 2 | Study 3 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Older Adults Financial Exploitation Measure (OAFEM) | Conrad et al.1 | 0-124 | ○ | ○ | ○ |
| Short Form of Financial Exploitation Vulnerability Scale (FEVS-SF) | Campbell & Lichtenberg14 | 0-18 |  |  | ○ |

rate your ability to perform certain everyday tasks NOW, as compared to 10
years ago”). The sum of all ratings is divided by the number of items
completed, with total scores ranging from 1 to 4 and higher scores reflecting
greater decline.

“◯” indicates a study used the measure.

^}{

Need to belong scale51. This 10-item scale measures participants’ desire

Need to belong scale51. This 10-item scale measures participants’ desire
for acceptance and belonging by asking how much they agree with specific
description of their related behaviors (e.g., “I try hard not to do things that
will make other people avoid or reject me.”) Participants indicate how much
they agree with the description using a five-point scale (1 = strongly disagree; 2 = moderately disagree; 3 = neither agree nor disagree; 4 = moderately agree; 5 = strongly agree). The sum of all ratings is used as total scores
ranging from 5 to 50 and higher scores reflecting higher need to belong.

. This 10-item scale measures participants’ desire
for acceptance and belonging by asking how much they agree with specific
description of their related behaviors (e.g., “I try hard not to do things that
will make other people avoid or reject me.”) Participants indicate how much
they agree with the description using a five-point scale (1 = strongly disagree; 2 = moderately disagree; 3 = neither agree nor disagree; 4 = moderately agree; 5 = strongly agree). The sum of all ratings is used as total scores
ranging from 5 to 50 and higher scores reflecting higher need to belong.

* * *

Perceived social support52. The 12-item scale measures participants’
subjective experience of social support by asking how much they agree with
specific descriptions of their related experience (e.g, “My family really tries to
help me.”). Participants indicate how much they agree with the description
using a seven-point scale (1 = very strongly disagree; 2 = strongly disagree;
3 = mildly disagree; 4 = neutral; 5 = mildly agree; 6 = strongly agree; 7 = very
strongly agree). The sum of all ratingsisdividedbythenumberofitems
completed, with total scores ranging from 1 to 7 and higher scores reflecting
higher perceived social support.
Persuadability and insensitivity to untrustworthiness cues subscales53.

higher perceived social support.
Persuadability and insensitivity to untrustworthiness cues subscales53.
We used these two subscales from the two-factor Gullibility Scale to measure
participants’ propensity to be persuaded and insensitivity to the presence of
untrustworthiness cues. Each subscale has six items asking how much the
participant agree with specific descriptions of their related behaviors (e.g,
“Your family thinks you are an easy target for scammers” from the persuadability subscale; “You are pretty poor at working out if someone is
tricking you” from the insensitivity to trustworthiness cues subscale). Participants indicate how much they agree with the description using a sevenpoint scale (1 = strongly disagree; 2 = disagree; 3 = somewhat disagree;
4 = neither agree nor disagree; 5 = somewhat agree; 6 = agree; 7 = strongly
agree). The sum of all ratings is used as total scores of each subscale ranging
from 6 to 42 and higher scores reflecting higher persuadability or insensitivity to trustworthiness cues.
54
Emotional regulation of others and self. We used this measure to

tivity to trustworthiness cues.
Emotional regulation of others and self
evaluate emotion regulation of improving or worsening the feelings of self
(i.e., intrinsic affect) of others (extrinsic affect). For each type of emotion
regulation (i.e., intrinsic affect improving, e.g., “I thought about my positive
characteristics to make myself feel better”; intrinsic affect worsening, e.g., “I
looked for problems in my current situation to make myself feel worse”;
extrinsic affect improving, e.g., “I gave someone helpful advice to try to
improve how they felt”; and extrinsic affect worsening, e.g., “Itoldsomeone
about their shortcomings to try to make them feel worse”), participants are
asked to report how much they had used specific strategies try to change
their own feelings (intrinsic items) or someone else’s feelings (extrinsic
items) (e.g., a extrinsic affect improving item: “Igavesomeonehelpfuladvice
to try to improve how they felt”). Participants answer by choosing from a
five-point scale of different amounts of effort in using a strategy (1 = not at
all; 2 = just a little; 3 = moderate amount;4=quiteabit;5=agreatdeal).
The sum of all ratings is divided by the number of items completed, with
total scores ranging from 1 to 5 and higher scores reflecting greater tendency
to regulate the emotion of oneself or others.

54
Emotional regulation of others and self. We used this measure to
evaluate emotion regulation of improving or worsening the feelings of self
(i.e., intrinsic affect) of others (extrinsic affect). For each type of emotion
regulation (i.e., intrinsic affect improving, e.g., “I thought about my positive
characteristics to make myself feel better”; intrinsic affect worsening, e.g., “I
looked for problems in my current situation to make myself feel worse”;
extrinsic affect improving, e.g., “I gave someone helpful advice to try to
improve how they felt”; and extrinsic affect worsening, e.g., “Itoldsomeone
about their shortcomings to try to make them feel worse”), participants are
asked to report how much they had used specific strategies try to change
their own feelings (intrinsic items) or someone else’s feelings (extrinsic
items) (e.g., a extrinsic affect improving item: “Igavesomeonehelpfuladvice
to try to improve how they felt”). Participants answer by choosing from a
five-point scale of different amounts of effort in using a strategy (1 = not at
all; 2 = just a little; 3 = moderate amount;4=quiteabit;5=agreatdeal).
The sum of all ratings is divided by the number of items completed, with
total scores ranging from 1 to 5 and higher scores reflecting greater tendency
to regulate the emotion of oneself or others.

Statistical analyses. One focus of Study 1 was to investigate how trust in
others and fairness preference during economic games may be associated
with self-reported financial exploitation.
evaluation of fairness from the Ultimatum Game trials using the difference in the proportion of rejection of unfair and fair monetary offers. We
measured trust in friends and in strangers using the average proportion of
money shared with each partner type during the Trust Game. We also
used the sum of the two proportions as a measure of overall trust in other
people and the difference between the two proportions as a measure of a
participant’s differentiation of trust in strangers versus friends. We
hypothesized that: (1) trust in others and financial exploitation would be

Statistical analyses. One focus of Study 1 was to investigate how trust in
others and fairness preference during economic games may be associated
exploitation. We measured participants’
evaluation of fairness from the Ultimatum Game trials using the difference in the proportion of rejection of unfair and fair monetary offers. We
measured trust in friends and in strangers using the average proportion of
money shared with each partner type during the Trust Game. We also
used the sum of the two proportions as a measure of overall trust in other
people and the difference between the two proportions as a measure of a
participant’s differentiation of trust in strangers versus friends. We
hypothesized that: (1) trust in others and financial exploitation would be

hypothesized that: (1) trust in others and financial exploitation would be
positively correlated; and (2) evaluation of fair and unfair monetary offers
would be associated with financial exploitation. Table S1 contains all the
pre-registered ( [https://osf.io/fcrus](https://osf.io/fcrus), February 17th, 2020) analyses we
conducted to test for effects of trust in others and fairness preference
during economic games.

conducted to test for effects of trust in others and fairness preference
during economic games.
ThesecondfocusofStudy1wastoexaminehowtheassociation

conducted to test for effects of trust in others and fairness preference
ThesecondfocusofStudy1wastoexaminehowtheassociation

We then used the sum of all coded items as a composite index for socioeconomic status. We hypothesized that people with lower socioeconomic
status will be more vulnerable to risk factors of poor health, larger cognitive
decline, lower perceived social support, higher need to belong, and poorer
emotion regulation. For example, we predicted that cognitive decline would
be positively associated with self-reported exploitation, and that this association would be stronger among individuals from lower versus higher SES.
Table S2 presents all the hypothesized interactions between socioeconomic
status and health-related and psychosocial factors. The scores for each
health-related and psychosocial factor are calculated according to their
original published description (see Table 4 for citation details).

Study 2 - Risk factors in an older adult sample from
Pennsylvania region
In Study 2, we sought to replicate our findings from Study 1 in a more

In Study 2, we sought to replicate our findings from Study 1 in a more
diversified population within the Pennsylvania region, USA. Our primary
goals were the same as in Study 1: To evaluate (1) how trust in others and
fairness preference during economic games may be associated with selfreported financial exploitation, and (2) how the association between
socioeconomic status and self-reported financial exploitation may be
moderated by health-related and psychosocial factors.

Participants. Similar to Study 1, a sample of older adults from the
Pennsylvania region was recruited using Qualtrics panels. Participants
were eligible to enroll in the study if they were 50 years of age or older and
currently lived in the Pennsylvania region. The participants were drawn
from various urban and rural areas across the state that encompass
varying levels of household incomes and were evenly split based on
gender (men and women). Qualtrics distributed the survey to participants based on their eligibility and the targeted income, geographic area,
and gender brackets. The final sample included 305 participants. The
majority of participants identified themselves as women (60.66%), white
(84.92%) and not-Hispanic (95.74%), and ranged in age from 50 to 94
(M = 61.78) (Table 1).

Materials. We retained most measures from Study 1 (Tables 1–4).
However, we do note a few key differences to the trust in others and
fairness preference measures and our collection of socioeconomic statusrelated metrics that were made in order to minimize survey length and
remove superfluous items to increase participant retention. In contrast to
Study 1 where we used six items for the Ultimatum Game, for Study 2 we
only assessed participants’ evaluation of one unfair offer from a hypothetical stranger. Similarly, instead of four items for the Trust Games as in
Study 1, in Study 2 we kept only one item of sharing money with a
hypothetical stranger. Also, in Study 2 we used a composite score of
participant’s education and maximum individual annual income as our
measure of socioeconomic status instead of ZIP code based household
income as we planned in our pre-registration. Although this measurement of socioeconomic status deviates from our pre-registration, we
believe it facilitates comparisons across studies when examining effects of
socioeconomic status. Sociodemographics (Tables 1 and 2), healthrelated and psychosocial measures (Table 4) were retained in their original form from Study 1. The survey also included several questions and
scales that are for other studies and are not reported here. Participants’
average total time to complete the survey is 32.98 min.

* * *

Table 4 \| Health-related and psychosocial measures

| Measure | Literature | Range | Study 1 | Study 2 | Study 3 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Measurement of everyday cognition(ECog) | Farias et al.,2011 | 1-7 | ○ | ○ | ○ |
| Patient-Reported outcomes measurement information system(PROMIS)physical health items | Hays et al.46 | 5-20 | ○ | ○ | ○ |
| Patient-Reported outcomes measurement information system(PROMIS) mental health items | Hays et al.46 | 5-20 | ○ |  | ○ |
| Trust in others(Dictator Games) | Berg et al.16 | 0-1 | ○ | (trust in strangers only,one question) | (one question for friend and one question for stranger) |
| Perceived fairness(Ultimatum Games) | Güth et al.15 | 0-1 | ○ | (fair offers only) | (fair offer only,one question) |
| Multidimensional scale of perceived social support | Zimet et al.52 | 1-7 | ○ | ○ | ○ |
| Need to belong scale | Leary et al.51 | 1-5 | ○ |  | ○ |
| Persuadability | Teunisse et al.53 | 1-7 | ○ | ○ | ○ |
| Insensitivity to trustworthiness cues | Teunisse et al.53 | 1-7 | ○ | ○ | ○ |
| Intrinsic affect-improving | Niven et al.54 | 1-5 | ○ | ○ |  |
| Intrinsic affect-worsening | Niven et al.54 | 1-5 | ○ | ○ |  |
| Extrinsic affect-improving | Niven et al.54 | 1-5 | ○ | ○ |  |
| Extrinsic affect worsening | Niven et al.54 | 1-5 | ○ | ○ |  |
| Cognitive Reflection Test(CRT) | Frederick55;Thomson & Oppenheimer56 | 0-7 |  |  | ○ |

We also added two new measures. First, in order to capture a second
assessment of risk for financial exploitation, we also administered The
FEVS-SF (Campbell & Lichtenberg14,Table3). FEVS-SF is a nine-item scale

“◯” indicates a study used the measure.

u}\_{0}

have statistically significant interactions with health, cognitive decline,
perceived social support, and emotion regulation.

Study 3 - Risk factors in a national sample of both younger and
older adults
Building off findings of interactions between socioeconomic status and

Materials. In Study 3 we again retained most scales from the previous
two studies (Table 1). One key change was made to the trust in others
and fairness preference measures during economic games due to
survey length changes. Similar to Study 2, we used one item of unfair
offer from a hypothetical stranger for the Ultimatum Game. Different
from Study 2 where we used one item of sharing money with a
hypothetical stranger from the Trust Game, in Study 3 we used two
items of monetary sharing, one with a hypothetical friend and one
with a hypothetical stranger.
We also added two new measures. First, in order to capture a second

that evaluates how people make decisions about financial transactions in the
real world. Each FEVS-SF item asks about different real-world experiences
regarding a participant’s personal finances; responses were coded using a
three-point scale wherein response options differed according to the question (e.g., “How confident are you in making big financial decisions?”,
0=confident; 1 = unsure; 2 = not confident; “How often do you feel anxious
about your financial decisions and/or transactions?”, 0 = never or rarely;
1 = sometimes; 2 = often). The final FEVS-SF score is a sum across all nine
items ranging from 0 to 18 and higher scores indicating higher financial
exploitation vulnerability. Second, we added an additional measure of
cognitive function, the Cognitive Reflection Test (Frederick55;Thomson&
Oppenheimer56) which measures the ability or disposition to resist reporting
an intuitive response that occurs to one first yet may be wrong (e.g., “How
many cubic feet of dirt are there in a hole that is 3 feet deep × 3 feet wide × 3
feet long? Please answer using a number. For example, please type “10”
instead of “ten.” The correct answer is 0 (zero). An example intuitive answer
is 27).

index of socioeconomic status (Table 2).
We predicted (1) psychosocial variables tied to trust, fairness, social
support, cognitive reflection, and need to belong will be associated with risk
for financial exploitation, and (2) these relationships will be moderated by
sociodemographic factors such as age, socioeconomic status, and race/
ethnicity and also health-related variables of cognitive decline, physical
health, and mental health. To test the hypotheses, we used the same robust
regression approach with age as a covariate and multiple comparison correction as in Study 1 and Study 2. We note that we tested our hypotheses
using both OAFEM and FEVS-SF, respectively as two distinct measures of
financial exploitation with non-overlapping items. We originally expected a

* * *

Table 5 \| Deviations from Pre-registrations

| Study | Area | Description | Reason |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Correction for multiple comparison | We used the approach in Derringer28 instead of Bonferroni correction. | We used the approach in Derringer28 to account for the non-independence among our tests. This approach offers a more balanced trade-off between false positives and false negatives. |
| 1 | Hypothesis testing and reporting | Hypotheses related to impulsivity were not reported in the manuscript. | Data for testing the hypotheses were only available in Study 1 but not in Studies 2 and 3 due to funding and survey length constraints. The lack of data for Studies 2 and 3 limited our ability to compare results across studies and draw convincing conclusions. Consequently, we chose not to report this hypothesis in the manuscript. |
| 1 & 2 |  | Hypotheses related to family history of Alzheimer's Disease (AD) or Alzheimer's related diseases (ADRD) were not tested or reported in the manuscript. | Evidence from the literature revealed significant challenges in obtaining reliable diagnosis of AD or dementia (e.g., Amiad et al., 2018). We were not initially aware of the difficulty in accurately measuring AD and ADRD, which prevented us from making convincing conclusions. As a result, we decided to exclude this hypothesis from testing. |
| 1 & 2 |  | Interaction analyses examining the relationship between emotion regulation and socioeconomic status were not specified in the preregistration. | These interaction hypotheses were unintentionally omitted from the preregistration due to an oversight, despite the corresponding main effects for emotion regulation and socioeconomic status being explicitly specified. Including these analyses aligns with our research objectives. |
| 2 |  | Hypotheses that were planned for investigating interactions that do not involve self-reported SES (i.e., Hypotheses d, f, g, h, i) were not reported. | These hypotheses were excluded because they were not aligned with the primary purpose of Study 1. Including these hypotheses would have deviated from the study's intended focus and objectives. |
| 3 |  | We used persuadability and insensitivity to trust cues as independent variables rather than as proxies for fraud (the dependent variable), as initially planned. | In Studies 2 and 3 analyses, persuadability and insensitivity to trust cues were incorporated as independent variables rather than proxies for fraud. To maintain methodological consistency across all three studies and facilitate direct comparison of results to draw convincing conclusions, we applied this approach to Study 1 as well. |
| 1, 2 & 3 | Analysis | Instead of ordinary linear squares (Study 1) and two-way ANOVAs that would categorize continuous variables using zeros and/or medians (Study 2 & 3), we used robust regression for all primary analyses. | This deviation was motivated by several factors. First, our key financial exploitation measure (OAFEM) was zero-inflated with extreme outliers, and various tests commonly violated the normality and homoscedasticity assumptions required for ANOVA. Moreover, discretizing a continuous variable into medians would have imposed relatively arbitrary cut-offs, hindering cross-study comparability and complicating interpretation. Robust regression allowed us to downweight the influence of outliers while preserving the continuous nature of our measures, thereby providing a better fit to the majority of the data. |
| 3 | Participant exclusion | Instead of planned exclusion of participants whose OAFEM and FEVS-SF risk categorizations (none, low, high) differed, we excluded participants whose z-transformed OAFEM and FEVs-SF scores show an absolute difference of two or above. | After planned exclusion, only 420 out of 933 participants remained. We deviated from the planned exclusion to balance between retaining enough power and having financial exploration measured more reliably. After the deviated exclusion, 844 out of 933 participants remained. |

OAFEM and FEVS-SF (r = 0.33, p < 0.001).
To balance between retaining enough power and having financial
exploitation measured more reliably, we decided to exclude participants
whose z-transformed OAFEM and FEVS-SF scores show an absolute difference of two or above. After exclusions, our final sample size was 844
(M = 48.06, SD = 19.57). We expected similar results using either OAFEM
or FEVS-SF as independent variables, respectively for this sample of 844
participants after filtering. However, the results were not consistent, especially the interaction results. Therefore, we report results from the 844
participants using OAFEM and FEVS-SF as our measures of financial
exploitation separately below.

Post-hoc analyses of financial exploitation measures
One pattern that unexpectedly stood out across three studies is the higher

Post-hoc analyses of financial exploitation measures
One pattern that unexpectedly stood out across three studies is the higher
mean of OAFEM in Study 3 (5.4 in Study 1, 4.3 in Study 2, and 14.3 in
Study 3). We explored the difference in Study 3 OAFEM scores in two
ways. (1) To determine whether higher scores within Study 3 were elevated due to differences in one or the other age sample, we conducted a
Welch two-sample t test comparing scores in younger and older adults.
(2) We conducted a Welch one-way ANOVA of OAFEM scores among
older adults across the three studies to determine if there was a study
effect.
Another pattern that unexpectedly stood out from Study 3 is the below 50 vs older adults of age 50 or above). We also conducted item-wise
analyses to explore item-level patterns of age.

Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio
Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Results
Study 1 - Risk factors in an older adult sample from Philadelphia

Study 1 - Risk factors in an older adult sample from Philadelphia
metropolitan area
To test the association between trust in others and fairness preference during

To test the association between trust in others and fairness preference during
economic games and risk for financial exploitation, we constructed models
regressing OAFEM onto a social-economic measure with age included as a
covariate. Table S1 contains a summary of estimates of regression coefficients as well as descriptive statistics for regressors. We did not find significant associations between OAFEM and trust in other people or
evaluations of fairness in others (all p-values > 0.15).
To test the interaction between socioeconomic status and other health-

evaluations of fairness in others (all p-values > 0.15).
To test the interaction between socioeconomic status and other healthrelated and psychosocial measures, for each potential interaction pair (e.g.,
socioeconomic status \* physical health), we built a model that regressed
OAFEM onto socioeconomic status, a health-related or psychosocial
measure of interest, and the interaction between the two variables, with age
included as a covariate. Table S2 presents a summary of estimates of
regression coefficients of interaction terms as well as descriptive statistics for
regressors. Results revealed a significant interaction between socioeconomic
status and the intrinsic affect-worsening component of our emotion reg-
2
ulation measures (b = −0.26, f = 0.008, 95%CI = \[0,0.095\], p <0.001). In
other words, greater risk for financial exploitation is positively associated
with a tendency to deliberately worsen one’s own feelings, and this association is stronger for individuals of lower socioeconomic status than higher
socioeconomic status (Fig. 1). No other interactions reached statistical
significance.

(b!=!-!0.26,,f^{2}!=!0.008,,95%!{\\mathrm{C I}}\ !!=!\[0.0.095\],,p!<!.000)),

Following the non-significant interactions between socioeconomic
status and the remaining health-related and psychosocial variables, we
explored their association with OAFEM (see Table S1 for a summary of
estimates). Results from these follow-up simple main effect analyses
revealed that, for health-related factors, higher OAFEM was associated with
2
worse physical health (b = −0.13, f = 0.022, 95%CI = \[0.007,0.048\],
2
p < 0.001), worse mental health (b = −0.14, f = 0.019, 95%CI =
\[0.006,0.039\], p < 0.001), and greater everyday cognitive decline (b = 0.16,
2
f = 0.030, 95%CI = \[0.011,0.071\], p < 0.001). Among psychosocial factors,
higher OAFEM was associated with lower perceived social support
2
(b = −0.10, f = 0.010, 95%CI = \[0.003,0.025\], p < 0.001) and stronger
2
extrinsic affect-improving (b = 0.07, f = 0.006, 95%CI = \[0.002,0.016\],
2
p < 0.001), extrinsic affect-worsening (b = 0.06, f = 0.004, 95%CI =
2
\[0,0.018\], p < 0.001), and intrinsic affect-improving (b =0.06, f = 0.005,
95%CI = \[0.001,0.014\], p < 0.001). Higher OAFEM was also associated with
2
higher persuadability (b = 0.17, f = 0.036, 95%CI = \[0.014,0.073\],
p < 0.001) and higher insensitivity to trustworthiness cues (b = 0.10,
2
f = 0.011, 95%CI = \[0.003,0.026\], p < 0.001). No significant association
between OAFEM and socioeconomic status was found.
Study 2 - Risk factors in an older adult sample from

f^{2}=0.030,950%l=(0.011,0.0771),p<0.0011)

(b=-0.10,\ f^{2}=0.010,\ ,550\_{0}\\mathrm{C I}=\[0.003,0.025\],\ ,<0.001)

(b!=!0.06,f^{2}!=!0.005,

f^{2}!=!0.036.

Study 2 - Risk factors in an older adult sample from
Pennsylvania region
In Study 2, we sought to replicate our findings from Study 1 in a more

Pennsylvania region
In Study 2, we sought to replicate our findings from Study 1 in a more
diversified population within the Pennsylvania region, USA. Our primary
goals were the same as in Study 1: To evaluate (1) how trust in others and
fairness preference during economic games may be associated with selfreported financial exploitation, and (2) how the association between
socioeconomic status and self-reported financial exploitation may be
moderated by health-related and psychosocial factors.
We first tested the associations between financial exploitation and trust

We first tested the associations between financial exploitation and trust
in others and fairness preference. Associations between trust in others and
fairness preference during economic games and financial exploitation are
shown in Table S3. Similar to Study 1, we did not find significant associations between OAFEM and proportion of money shared with a hypothetical
stranger or rejecting an unfair monetary offer.
We then tested our hypothesized interactions between socioeconomic

(6=-0.57,s^{2}=0.024.950%n l=100.176)

We then tested our hypothesized interactions between socioeconomic
status and health-related and psychosocial factors. Table S4 presents a
summary of estimates of regression coefficients of interaction terms as well
as descriptive statistics for regressors. Similar to Study 1, we again found that
OAFEM is positively associated with intrinsic affect-worsening, and this
positive association is stronger for individuals of lower socioeconomic status
2
than higher socioeconomic status (b = −0.57, f = 0.024, 95%CI = \[0,0.176\],
p < 0.001, Fig. 2A). We also found several other moderating effects of
socioeconomic status on the association between extrinsic affect-worsening,
everyday cognitive decline, and persuadability (Fig. 2B–D). Compared to
individuals with higher socioeconomic status, those with lower socioeconomic status showed stronger positive associations between OAFEM
2
and extrinsic affect-worsening (b = −0.50, f = 0.051, 95%CI = \[0,0.367\],
2
p < 0.001), everyday cognitive decline (b = −0.63, f = 0.007, 95%CI =
2
\[−0.005,0.099\], p < 0.001), and persuadability (b = −0.04, f = 0.025, 95%
CI = \[0,0.273\], p < 0.001).
Following the non-significant interactions between socioeconomic

Study 3 - Risk factors in a national sample of both younger and
older adults
Using OAFEM as a measure for financial exploitation, we first examined

Using OAFEM as a measure for financial exploitation, we first examined
associations between OAFEM and the psychosocial factors of interest
(Table S5). We found higher OAFEM scores were associated with lower

* * *

A

Fig. 2 \| Study 2 SES interactions. Scatterplots (n = 305 participants) with regression
lines showing associations between OAFEM (Older Adult Financial Exploitation
Measure) and the interaction between risk factors. Regression lines represent
interaction between SES (socioeconomic status) and intrinsic affect-worsening (A),
extrinsic affect-worsening (B), everyday cognitive decline (C), and persuadability
(D) with age, race, and gender controlled. Different lines represent the relationship

D

between the variables at different levels of the moderator: the dark solid line shows
+1 SD (standard deviation) above the mean, the dashed line represents the mean,
and the light dashed line indicates −1 SD below the mean of the moderator. To
facilitate visualization, data points are jittered horizontally and 3 data points (out of
305 total) with OAFEM larger than 40 are not shown.

p!<!0.001).

(b!=!-\ 0.0.

Following the significant associations between OAFEM and perceived
social support, need to belong, persuadability, and insensitivity to trustworthiness cues, we then tested for potential moderation of sociodemographic and health-related factors on these associations after
controlling for age. Table S6 presents all the moderation analyses and results.
Compared to younger individuals, older individuals showed weaker positive
association between OAFEM and insensitivity to trustworthiness cues
(b = −0.01, f2 = 0.008, 95%CI = \[0,0.023\], p = 0.003, Fig. 3A) and persuadability (b = −0.01, f2 = 0.018, 95%CI = \[0.003,0.057\], p =0.001,Fig.3B). We
also found the positive association between OAFEM and persuadability is
stronger for people with higher SES than people with lower SES (b = 0.04,
f2 = 0.015, 95%CI = \[0,0.063\], p = 0.002, Fig. 4). We did not find any other
significant moderation of sociodemographic and health-related factors.
We then explored the effects of sociodemographic and health-related

f^{2}!=!0.027

f^{2}!=!0.047

p!<!0.001\

f^{2}!=!0.035

found that when controlling for age, gender, race, and education, similar to
what we found in Study 1 higher OAFEM was associated with worse phy-
2
sical health (b = −0.10, f = 0.015, 95%CI = \[0.005,0.032\], p < 0.001). We
also found, similarly to Study 1 and Study 2, higher OAFEM was associated
2
with more everyday cognitive decline (b = 0.25, f = 0.087, 95%CI =
\[0.031,0.146\], p < 0.001) (Table S5).
We also tested our hypotheses using FEVS-SF as a measure for

\\lcorner\ (b=-0.10,,f^{2}=\ \ bar{0}.015,\ 9590\\mathrm{C I}=\[0.005,\ 0.032\],\ p<0.001)\ .

We also tested our hypotheses using FEVS-SF as a measure for
financial exploitation. Again we first examined associations between FEVS-
SF and the psychosocial factors of interest after controlling for age, gender,
race, and education (Table S7). Similar to OAFEM, higher FEVS-SF was
2
associated with lower perceived social support (b = −0.20, f = 0.047, 95%
2
CI = \[0.014,0.075\], p < 0.001), higher need to belong (b = 0.16, f = 0.027,
95%CI = \[0.007,0.052\], p < 0.001), higher persuadability (b = 0.28,
2
f = 0.092, 95%CI = \[0.043,0.125\], p < 0.001), and higher insensitivity to
2
trustworthiness cues (b =0.23, f = 0.058, 95%CI = \[0.021,0.088\],
p < 0.001). Also similar to OAFEM, we did not find significant associations
between FEVS-SF and rejecting an unfair monetary offer or between FEVS-
SF with the proportion of money shared with a hypothetical stranger or
friend.
Following the significant associations between FEVS-SF and perceived

* * *

Fig. 3 \| Study 3 age interaction, OAFEM. Scatterplots (n = 844 participants) with regression lines
showing associations between OAFEM (Older
Adult Financial Exploitation Measure) and the
interaction between risk factors. Regression lines
represent interaction between age and insensitivity
to trustworthiness cues (A) and age and persuadability (B) with race, gender, and education controlled. Different lines represent the relationship
between the variables at different levels of the
moderator: the dark solid line shows +1 SD (standard deviation) above the mean, the dashed line
represents the mean, and the light dashed line
indicates −1 SD below the mean of the moderator.

Fig. 4 \| Study 3 SES interaction, OAFEM. Scatterplots (n = 844 participants) with
regression lines showing associations between OAFEM (Older Adult Financial
Exploitation Measure) and the interaction between risk factors. Regression lines
represent interaction between SES (socioeconomic status) and persuadability with
age, race, and gender controlled. Different lines represent the relationship between
the variables at different levels of the moderator: the dark solid line shows +1SD
(standard deviation) above the mean, the dashed line represents the mean, and the
light dashed line indicates −1 SD below the mean of the moderator.

Table S8 presents all the moderation analyses and results. Different from
OAFEM, we found the positive associations between FEVS-SF and persuadability and insensitivity to trustworthinesscueswereweakerforpeople
2
reporting higher everyday cognitive decline (b = −0.12, f = 0.016, 95%
2
CI = \[0.002,0.027\], p = 0.001; b = −0.19, f = 0.019, 95%CI = \[0.003,0.032\],
p < 0.001, Fig. 5). We did not find any other significant moderation of
sociodemographic and health-related factors.
We then explored the effects of sociodemographic and health-related

f^{2}!=!0.050,\ ~\ 95%\\mathrm{C I}=\[0.018\ \ .075\],\ \ p!<!0.001)

\ {mathbf C{mathbf{hat I1}}}=\[0.{{\\mathbf{0}}02},{{\\mathbf{0}}}{{\\mathbf{0}}227}\],\ {\\mathbf{{\\dot}{}}}}&{{{{\\mathbf{0}}}0.0{\\mathbf{0}}11};{\ \ {\\mathbf{}}{{\\mathbf{{dot{b}}}}}}=-0.19,f^{2}=0.019,959\_{0}{\\mathrm{C I}}=\[0.003,0.032\],

(b\ -0.39,\ r^{2}!=,.118,,,,559\_{0}\\mathrm{C I}=\[0.122\ \\mathrm0.251\
\
Study and age group effects on financial exploitation measures\
To examine the higher Study 3 OAFEM score compared to Study 1 and\
Study 2, we first explored within Study 3 to find out whether the younger\
adults had higher scores than the older adults. We found that younger adults\
of age below 50 in Study 3 reported higher OAFEM than older adults\
(t(634.5) = −11.96, Cohen’s d = −0.789, 95%CI = \[−0.929, −0.648\],\
p < 0.001). After removing younger adults that were uniquely included in\
Study 3 but not in Study 1 or Study 2, we then explored among only older\
adults across studies to find out whether there was a study effect on OAFEM\
scores. Although after excluding younger adults the OAFEM mean of Study\
3 decreased from 14.3 to 7.41, there was still a significant study effect on\
older adults’ OAFEM scores across studies (Welch’s ANOVA, F(2,\
769.94) = 3.80, η2 = 0.010, 95%CI = \[0.000, 0.026\], p = 0.023). Post-hoc t\
tests further revealed that Study 3 OAFEM score was significantly higher\
than Study 2 (t(695.7) = −2.72, Cohen’s d = −0.202, 95%CI = \[−0.352,\
−0.052\], p = 0.020, corrected using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure).\
We did not find any other significant pairwise differences.\
To explore the relatively higher FEVS score than OAFEM score within\
\
(t(634.5),{=},-11.96.\
\
842)=608.37,\\eta^{2}=0.419,950\ \\mathrm{C I}=\[0.372,0.462\],p<0.001),\
\
:t t6(99..)=-2.7\\dot{2},\
\
To explore the relatively higher FEVS score than OAFEM score within\
Study 3, we normalized OAFEM and FEVS scores into percentages using\
each measure’s own maximum possible score and conducted repeatedmeasures ANOVA. Results showed a main effect of measure type (F(1,\
2\
842) = 608.37, η = 0.419, 95%CI = \[0.372, 0.462\], p < 0.001), a main effect of\
2\
age (F(1, 842) = 190.1, η = 0.184, 95%CI = \[0.140, 0.229\], p < 0.001), and an\
interaction between effects of measure type and age (F(1, 842) = 10.01,\
η2 = 0.012, 95%CI = \[0.002, 0.030\], p = 0.002). Follow-up simple main effect\
analysesshowbothyoungerandolderadultsscoredhigheronFEVSthanon\
OAFEM, and the difference between the two scores is larger among younger\
adults than older adults. However, when we conducted the analysis using the\
full, unfiltered sample (i.e., prior to filtering out participants whose\
z-transformed OAFEM and FEVS-SF scores differed by an absolute value\
above two), the interaction was no longer significant (F(1, 931) = 0.57,\
η2 = 0.001, 95%CI = \[0, 0.008\], p = 0.451); the main effects of measure type\
suadability and insensitivity to trustworthinesscueswereweakerforpeople and age remained significant (F(1, 931) = 379.53, η2 = 0.290, 95%CI =\
\[0.243, 0.334\], p < 0.001; F(1, 931) = 242.5, η2 = 0.207, 95%CI = \[0.163,\
0.250\], p < 0.001). We also conducted item-wise analyses to explore whether\
there were age patterns at the item level in OAFEM and FEVS-SF. We found\
all items in OAFEM and FEVS-SF were negatively associated with age.\
Younger people thus showed higher vulnerability to exploitation across all\
itemsinbothOAFEMandFEVS-SFcomparedtoolderpeople.\
\
Discussion\
In three studies that sampled diversely from older adults of the Philadelphia\
metropolitan area (Study 1), older adults across Pennsylvania (Study 2), and\
both younger and older adults across the United States (Study 3), we\
examined associations between self-reported measures of financial\
\
n^{2}=0.001,950%l=l1,0.008,=.44l\
\
\[0.243, ~~0.334\],~~ p<0.001; ~~F(1,~~ 931)=242.5, ~~\\eta^{2}=0.207,~~ 9596\\mathrm{C I}=\[0.163,~034\],~~\
\
* * *\
\
Fig. 5 \| FEVS-SF interaction. Scatterplots (n = 844\
participants) with regression lines showing associations between FEVS-SF (the Short Form of\
Financial Exploitation Vulnerability Scale) and the\
interaction between risk factors. Regression lines\
represent interaction between everyday cognitive\
decline and persuadability (A) and insensitivity to\
trustworthiness cues (B) with age, race, gender, and\
education controlled. Different lines represent the\
relationship between the variables at different levels\
of the moderator: the dark solid line shows +1SD\
(standard deviation) above the mean, the dashed\
line represents the mean, and the light dashed line\
indicates −1 SD below the mean of the moderator.\
\
One of our primary goals was to investigate how trust in others during\
economic games may be associated with self-reported financial exploitation.\
16\
Using the Trust Game (Berg et al.), to measure people’s tendency to trust\
others in financial contexts, we did not find any significant associations\
between trust and financial exploitation, including interactions with other\
factors. However, when considering insensitivity to trustworthiness cues\
53\
and persuadability from the Two-Factor Gullibility Scale (Teunisse et al.),\
we found consistent statistically significant relationships across all three\
studies; specifically, greater insensitivity to trustworthiness cues and persuadability were associated with greater financial exploitation risk. Our\
exploratory analyses following the different results from the Trust Game\
and the Two-Factor Gullibility Scale showed only weak correlations\
between the measures (all absolute rs < 0.16, Fig. S1). One possible explanation for the weak correlations might be the weak ecological validity of the\
Trust Game and Ultimatum Game due to the lack of incentive compatibility. The Trust Games and Ultimatum Game we used to measure trust\
and fairness preference in each study all used hypothetical scenarios, and the\
amount of money mentioned in each scenario was relatively small. Moreover, the participant’s decisions had no real-world financial consequences,\
such as bonus money on top of participation compensation. Therefore,\
participants’ responses may not have reflected participants’ natural trust and\
fairness preference in the real world where their related decisions have\
concrete and often significant financial consequences, such as becoming\
financial exploitation victims. In contrast, the persuadability and insensitivity to trustworthiness scales ask participants to evaluate their own realworld behavior tendencies. Although there is a chance that participants’\
Communications Psychology \| (2025) 3:88\
\
exploitation and the relatively understudied construct of trust in others and\
fairness preference during economic games,aswellasinteractionswithand\
between previously-establish putative risk factors. Our goals were to address\
gaps in the literature of financial exploitation susceptibility in diverse and\
vulnerable populations, test hypotheses across three separate cohorts, and\
contribute towards a comprehensive understanding to inform future risk\
reduction efforts. In Study 1 and Study 2, we found participants with lower\
socioeconomic status and a higher tendency to deliberately worsen their\
feelings were at the greatest risk for financial exploitation. Additionally in\
Study 2, we found participants with lower socioeconomic status and higher\
self-reported cognitive decline, persuadability, or extrinsic affect-worsening\
were at the greatest risk for financial exploitation. In Study 3, consistent\
across two financial exploitation vulnerability measures, we found that\
higher financial exploitation risk was associated with decreased social\
support, increased need to belong, increased persuadability, increased\
insensitivity to trustworthiness cues, and decreased mental health. Across\
three studies, we consistently found greater insensitivity to trustworthiness\
cues and persuadability were associated with greater financial exploitation\
risk. Taken together, our findings suggest that risk for financial exploitation\
is dependent upon a combination of psychosocial, demographic, and health\
factors.\
One of our primary goals was to investigate how trust in others during\
\
responses might be biased toward showing a more socially and subjectively\
desirable image (e.g., not easily fooled and sensitive to trustworthiness cues),\
this possibility only strengthens our findings of significant associations\
between financial exploitation and persuadability/insensitivity across all\
three studies.\
Previous studies examining the direct effects of SES on risk of financial\
\
three studies.\
Previous studies examining the direct effects of SES on risk of financial\
4,26\
exploitation have been inconsistent. In our research, the main effect of\
socioeconomic status was also inconsistent across studies. However, when\
we examined potential interactions between socioeconomic status and other\
psychosocial factors, one consistent effect we found is the interaction\
between SES and intrinsic affect-worsening: individuals with lower SES were\
particularly at risk for financial exploitation when they demonstrated a\
greater tendency to worsen their own or others’ feelings. Future research and\
interventions aimed at minimizing financial exploitation risk among low\
SES groups may benefit from further investigating and addressing these\
interacting factors. Intrinsic affect-worsening (i.e., deliberate worsening of\
one’s feelings) is one such factor worth considering, given multiple observed\
main and interactive effects. In other words, individuals who were more\
likely to focus on their own shortcomings, negative experiences or problems\
were at greater risk for financial exploitation—in general and particularly for\
lower SES individuals. Intrinsic affect-worsening is associated with emotional exhaustion and health-related impairments54, and is also observed in\
clinical depression57.Thus,thehigherfinancial exploitation risk we found\
among lower SES individuals with higher intrinsic affect-worsening suggests depressed individuals from lower SES background are particularly\
vulnerable to financial exploitation. Such individuals may benefitfrom\
targeted interventions focusing on practical strategies to raise awareness of\
fraud or psychoeducation surrounding the relationship between mood and\
financial exploitation risk. Future intervention studies should compare the\
efficacy of community resources geared toward particular at-risk groups\
versus generic educational resources.\
Another potential at-risk group consistently identified from our find- study—recognize malicious intent and minimize financial exploitation susceptibility. Example intervention candidates include introducing and training\
concrete problem solving strategies, internal and external memory strategies\
thatmaybeusedtokeeptrackofpriorattempts or negative incidents with\
certain individuals, and identifying and attending to different types of\
62\
affective information (e.g., verbal and non-verbal cues). Future studies may\
wish to systematically test the feasibility and efficacy of these types of\
interventions for the purpose of minimizing financial exploitation risk.\
Our results also showed some unexpected but nevertheless important\
\
Our results also showed some unexpected but nevertheless important\
patterns of age effect within and across studies. First, within Study 3,\
younger adults scored higher than older adults on both financial exploitation measures we used (OAFEM and FEVS-SF). This might be the result of\
younger adults being more likely to report losing money toscamsthanolder\
35,36\
adults. One possible explanation to more scams reported by younger\
people is that younger people spend longer time online63 and are more likely\
to trust information from social media sites64, both of which may have\
increased their exposure to potential scammers.\
Another unexpected pattern in our financial exploitation measures is\
\
increased their exposure to potential scammers.\
Another unexpected pattern in our financial exploitation measures is\
observed when comparing OAFEM with FEVS-SF: both younger and older\
adults reported higher FEVS-SF than OAFEM. This pattern might be\
related to the different ways OAFEM and FEVS-SF measure risk for\
financial exploitation and. OAFEM uses items that describe key behaviors\
related to financial exploitation, whereas FEVS-SF focuses on the context in\
which a person is making a financial decision. People fall prey to financial\
exploitation only when there are perpetrators to fall prey to. Therefore,\
people who show higher contextual risk for financial exploitation, as\
reflected by higher FEVS-SF, may not necessarily have actually had behavioral experiences related to financial exploitation. For an extreme example,\
in a safe environment where there are no perpetrators, even the most at-risk\
people as measured by FEVS-SF may report zero behaviors related to\
financial exploitation and score zero on OAFEM. Future research would\
benefit from examining environmental effects such as neighborhood disadvantage, which have been suggested to be correlated with fraud (e.g.,\
65\
Ranson et al.), on risk for and substantiated cases of financial exploitation.\
We also found differences on OAFEM scores across studies. Specifi-\
\
Limitations\
We note that our study has a few notable limitations which may contribute to the inconsistency within our own results. First, measuring risk\
for financial exploitation is challenging and often limited to self-report\
data. Although several different instruments have been developed, it\
remains unclear how they are associated with risk for specific types of\
financial exploitation, such as consumer fraud versus imposter schemes27.\
Different types of financial exploitation (e.g., perpetration by a stranger\
versus a close friend or family member) may be associated with both\
specific and common risk factors. Others have found that strangerinitiated scams are particularly common among older adults experien-\
66–70\
cing social isolation, whereas different mechanisms including lifespan\
psychosocial and emotional changes posited by the Socioemotional\
Selectivity Theory may play a role in susceptibility to exploitation by\
14,71,72\
family and friends. Although we attempted to uncover the role of\
various risk factors on different aspects of financial exploitation by using\
two measures (OAFEM and FEVS-SF) that assess different aspects of\
financial exploitation risk (Study 3), we were unable to investigate the\
\
role of perpetrator type due to limitations of the measures and the survey\
format of our study. This represents an important future direction for\
research, and the risk factors identified in the present study should be\
investigated in the context of specificformsoffinancial exploitation.\
Given the difficulties in collecting and validating people’s\
\
investigated in the context of specificformsoffinancial exploitation.\
Given the difficulties in collecting and validating people’s\
experiences with financial exploitation for reasons such as scamrelated stigma73, self reports might not be an accurate reflection of\
actual financial exploitations. In addition, many self-report measures\
of financial exploitation do not assess frequency of financial exploitation. Without such frequency information, a person who was victimized once by, for example, online survey scam, would look the\
same as someone who had been victimized by multiple online survey\
scams, resulting in inaccurate overall amount of financial exploitation\
experienced. Furthermore, financial exploitation scales that have been\
in major use are almost developed and validated using older people\
of 60 years of age or above74, including the OAFEM and FEVS-SF we\
used in our own studies. Younger adults’ daily activities and\
experiences can be quite different from older adults and may face\
different financial exploitation risks. According to reports from the\
35,36\
Federal Trade Commission, younger adults report losing money\
to scams more often than older adults. The type of scams younger\
adults report being victims of are often also different from those\
reported by older adults. For example, younger adults are more likely\
to report impersonator scams, online shopping scams, job scams, and\
investment scams, whereas older adults are more likely to report\
falling victim to tech support scams and prize/sweepstakes/lottery\
scams. In OAFEM and FEVS-SF, several items of both scales relate to\
the types of scams that are common among younger people. For\
example, in OAFEM, items mapping on to “Abuse of Trust” (e.g.,\
“Has someone borrowed money and not paid it back?”)and“Theft &\
Scams” (e.g., “Has someone tricked or pressured you into buying\
something that you now regret buying? ”) may relate to impersonator\
scams, online shopping scams, and investment scams that more\
commonly target younger adults. For FEVS–SF, although the items\
ask about the contextual information of the environment in which a\
person is making a financial decision rather than specific financial\
exploitation related behaviors, they assess real-world financial\
transaction decision-making, with which younger adults may struggle\
more due to lack of knowledge and/or experience comparing to older\
adults. Although there are several items in both OAFEM and FEVS-\
SF that may capture risk for financial exploitation among younger\
people, formal validation is needed and is beyond the scope of current studies. OAFEM, FEVS-SF, and other financial exploitation\
scales for older people may not be able to accurately capture financial\
exploitation risks for younger people. Without a validated financial\
exploitation scale for both younger and older adults, it will be difficult to have a comprehensive and reliable understanding of financial\
exploitation, especially its association with age and related factors. All\
these difficultiesinmeasuringriskforfinancial exploitation may\
contribute to the inconsistency in some of the main effects and in\
interactions between factors that we observed across studies.\
Beyond the measurement of financial exploitation—an issue that\
\
* * *\
\
Our work helps provide a fuller characterization of risk factors that contribute to financial exploitation. Findings across all studies showed trust in\
others, fairness preference, health-related factors, sociodemographics, and\
psychosocial factors contributed to a more comprehensive understanding of\
financial exploitation risk and provide guidance to those fighting against\
financial exploitation.\
\
All data used in this study are questionnaire and survey data. The data and\
zip code-based median household income codebook are available on https://\
doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/WXY2V.\
\
Code availability\
The code for analyses\
\
The code for analyses is available on [https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF](https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF).\
IO/WXY2V.\
\
Received:12February2024;Accepted:14May2025;\
\
Published online: 05 June 2025\
\
References\
\
01. Conrad, K. J., Iris, M., Ridings, J. W., Langley, K. & Wilber, K. H. Selfreport measure of financial exploitation of older adults. Gerontologist\
    50, 758–773 (2010).\
\
02. Roberto, K. & Teaster, P. The MetLife Study of Elder Financial\
    Abuse: Crimes of Occasion, Desperation, and Predation Against\
    America’s Elders. The MetLife Mature Market Institute. https://\
    ltcombudsman.org/uploads/files/issues/mmi-elder-financial-abuse.\
    pdf (2011).\
\
03. Deane, S. Elder Financial Exploitation. U.S. Securities and Exchange\
    Commission. [https://www.sec.gov/files/elder-financial-exploitation](https://www.sec.gov/files/elder-financial-exploitation).\
    pdf (2018).\
\
04. Hall, J., Karch, D. L. & Crosby, A. Uniform definitions and\
    recommended core data elements for use in elder abuse surveillance.\
    Version 1.0. [https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/37909](https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/37909) (2016).\
\
05. Gunderson, C. A. & ten Brinke, L. The connection between deception\
    detection and financial exploitation of older (vs. young) adults. J. Appl.\
    Gerontol. 41, 940–944 (2022).\
\
06. James, B. D., Boyle, P. A. & Bennett, D. A. Correlates of susceptibility\
    to scams in older adults without dementia. J. Elder Abuse Negl. 26,\
    107–122 (2014).\
\
07. Kircanski, K. et al. Emotional arousal may increase susceptibility to\
    fraud in older and younger adults. Psychol. Aging 33, 325–337 (2018).\
\
08. Hanoch, Y. & Wood, S. The scams among us: who falls prey and why.\
    Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 30, 260–266 (2021).\
\
09. Lichtenberg, P. A., Campbell, R. & Hall, L. Psychological aspects\
    of elder financial exploitation: risk factors, intervention\
    approaches, and case studies. In A Fresh Look at Fraud:\
    Theoretical and Applied Perspectives, 1st edn (eds Hanoch, Y. &.\
    Wood, S.) 88–110 (Routledge, 2022).\
\
10. Spreng, R. N., Karlawish, J. & Marson, D. C. Cognitive, social, and\
    neural determinants of diminished decision-making and financial\
    exploitation risk in aging and dementia: a review and new model. J.\
    Elder Abuse Negl. 28, 320–344 (2016).\
\
11. Walzak, L. C. & Thornton, W. L. Cognitive and metacognitive\
    predictors of financial exploitation: understanding fraud susceptibility\
    in adulthood. In A Fresh Look at Fraud: Theoretical and Applied\
    Perspectives, 1st edn (eds Hanoch, Y. & Wood, S.) 111–129\
    (Routledge, 2022)\
\
12. Epstein, L. H. et al. Effects of 6-month episodic future thinking training\
    on delay discounting, weight loss and HbA1c changes in individuals\
    with prediabetes. J. Behav. Med. 45, 227–239 (2022).\
\
13. Scholz, C., C. Baek, E. & Falk, E. B. Invoking self-related and social\
    thoughts impacts online information sharing. Soc. Cogn. Affect.\
\
14. Campbell, R. J. & Lichtenberg, P. A. A short form of the financial\
    exploitation vulnerability scale. Clin. Gerontol. 44, 594–603 (2021).\
\
15. Güth, W., Schmittberger, R. & Schwarze, B. An experimental\
    analysis of ultimatum bargaining. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 3,\
    367–388 (1982).\
\
16. Berg, J., Dickhaut, J. & McCabe, K. Trust, reciprocity, and social\
    history. Games Econ. Behav. 10, 122–142 (1995).\
\
17. Levitt, S. D. & List, J. A. What do laboratory experiments measuring\
    social preferences reveal about the real world?. J. Econ. Perspect. 21,\
    153–174 (2007).\
\
18. Thielmann,I.,Böhm,R.,Ott,M.&Hilbig,B.E.Economicgames:an\
    introduction and guide for research. Collabra Psychol. 7, 19004 (2021).\
\
19. van Dijk, E., De Dreu, C. K. & Gross, J. Power in economic games.\
    Curr. Opin. Psychol. 33, 100–104 (2020).\
\
20. Fehr, E., Klein, A. & Schmidt, K. M. Fairness and contract design.\
    Econometrica 75, 121–154 (2007).\
\
21. Wood, S. A., Liu, P.-J., Hanoch, Y. & Estevez-Cores, S. Importance of\
    numeracy as a risk factor for elder financial exploitation in a\
    community sample. J. Gerontol. Ser. B 71, 978–986 (2016).\
\
22. Acierno, R. et al. Prevalence and correlates of emotional, physical,\
    sexual, and financial abuse and potential neglect in the United States:\
    the national elder mistreatment study. Am. J. Public Health 100,\
    292–297 (2010).\
\
23. Boyle, P. A., Yu, L., Schneider, J. A., Wilson, R. S. & Bennett, D. A.\
    Scam awareness related to incident Alzheimer dementia and mild\
    cognitive impairment: a prospective cohort study. Ann. Intern. Med.\
    170, 702 (2019).\
\
24. Han, S. D. Vulnerability to financial exploitation in older age: a\
    neuropsychology perspective. In A Fresh Look at Fraud: Theoretical\
    and Applied Perspectives. 1st edn (eds Hanoch, Y. & Wood, S.)\
    130–143 (Routledge, 2022)\
\
25. Hall, L., Moray, J., Gross, E. & Lichtenberg, P. A. Financial stressors\
    and resources associated with financial exploitation. Innov. Aging 6,\
    igac010 (2022)\
\
26. Sur, A., DeLiema, M. & Brown, E. Contextual and social predictors of\
    scam susceptibility and fraud victimization. SSRN Electron. J. https://\
    doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4053903. (2021).\
\
27. Nguyen, A. L. et al. Perceived types, causes, and consequences of\
    financial exploitation: narratives from older adults. J. Gerontol. Ser. B\
    76, 996–1004 (2021).\
\
28. Shao, J. et al. Credulity rather than general trust may increase\
    vulnerability to fraud in older adults: a moderated mediation model. J.\
    Elder Abuse Negl. 31, 146–162 (2019).\
\
29. Shao, J., Zhang, Q., Ren, Y., Li, X. & Lin, T. Why are older adults victims\
    of fraud? Current knowledge and prospects regarding older adults’\
    vulnerability to fraud. J. Elder Abuse Negl. 31, 225–243 (2019).\
\
30. Liu, P.-J., Wood, S., Xi, P., Berger, D. E. & Wilber, K. The role of social\
    support in elder financial exploitation using a community sample.\
    Innov. Aging 1, igx016 (2017).\
\
31. Ross, M., Grossmann, I. & Schryer, E. Contrary to psychological and\
    popular opinion, there is no compelling evidence that older adults are\
    disproportionately victimized by consumer fraud. Perspect. Psychol.\
    Sci. 9, 427–442 (2014).\
\
32. Beach, S. R., Schulz, R. & Sneed, R. Associations between social\
    support, social networks, and financial exploitation in older adults. J.\
    Appl. Gerontol. 37, 990–1011 (2018).\
\
33. Weissberger, G. & Bergman, Y. S. The association between subjective\
    age and financial exploitation vulnerability among older adults: the\
    moderating role of social support. J. Elder Abuse Negl. 34, 314–324\
    (2022).\
\
34. Campisi, N. The 10 Most Scammed States in America. [https://www](https://www/).\
    forbes.com/advisor/credit-cards/most-scammed-states-inamerica/ (Forbes Advis, 2023).\
\
35. Federal Trade Commission. Who Experiences Scams? A Story for All\
    Ages (2022). Federal Trade Commission. [https://www.ftc.gov/news-](https://www.ftc.gov/news-)\
\
36. Scholz, C., C. Baek, E. & Falk, E. B. Invoking self-related and social\
    thoughts impacts online information sharing. Soc. Cogn. Affect.\
    Neurosci. 18, nsad013 (2023).\
\
37. Federal Trade Commission. Who Experiences Scams? A Story for All\
    Ages (2022). Federal Trade Commission. [https://www.ftc.gov/news-](https://www.ftc.gov/news-) [https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271-025-00266-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271-025-00266-x)\
    events/data-visualizations/data-spotlight/2022/12/who-experiences-59.\
    scams-story-all-ages\
\
38. Federal Trade Commission. Consumer Sentinel Network Data Book\
\
39. Federal Trade Commission. [https://www.ftc.gov/reports/](https://www.ftc.gov/reports/)\
    consumer-sentinel-network-data-book-2023 (2024). 60.\
\
40. Hall, L., Moray, J., Gross, E. & Lichtenberg, P. A. The relationship\
    between financial decision-making and financial exploitation in older\
    black adults. J. Aging Health 34, 472–481 (2022). 61.\
\
41. Derringer, J. A simple correction for non-independent tests. Preprint\
    at PsyArXiv, [https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/f2tyw](https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/f2tyw) (2018).\
\
42. R Core Team (2023). R: A language and environment for statistical\
    computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. 62.\
    [https://www.R-project.org/](https://www.r-project.org/).\
\
43. Venables, W. N. & Ripley, B. D. Modern Applied Statistics with S, 4th\
    ed. (Springer, New York, 2022). [https://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/pub/](https://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/pub/) 63.\
    MASS4/ (2002).\
\
44. Maechler, M. sfsmisc: Utilities from “Seminar fuer Statistik” ETH 64.\
    Zurich. [https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.sfsmisc](https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.sfsmisc) (2004).\
\
45. Cantoni, E. & Ronchetti, E. A robust approach for skewed and heavytailed outcomes in the analysis of health care expenditures. J. Health\
    Econ. 25, 198–213 (2006). 65.\
\
46. Delacre, M., Leys, C., Mora, Y. L. & Lakens, D. Taking parametric\
    assumptions seriously: arguments for the use of Welch’s F-test\
    instead of the classical F-test in one-way ANOVA. rips 32, 13 (2019). 66.\
\
47. Fareri, D. S. et al. Age-related differences in ventral striatal and default\
    mode network function during reciprocated trust. NeuroImage 256,\
    119267 (2022). 67.\
\
48. Ader, D. N. Developing the patient-reported outcomes measurement\
    information system (PROMIS). Med. Care 45, S1 (2007).\
\
49. Hays, R. D., Bjorner, J. B., Revicki, D. A., Spritzer, K. L. & Cella, D.\
    Development of physical and mental health summary scores from the 68.\
    patient-reported outcomes measurement information system\
    (PROMIS) global items. Qual. Life Res. 18, 873–880 (2009). 69.\
\
50. Farias, S. T. et al. The measurement of everyday cognition (ECog):\
    scale development and psychometric properties. Neuropsychology 70.\
    22, 531–544 (2008).\
\
51. Farias, S. T. et al. Early Functional Limitations in Cognitively Normal\
    Older Adults Predict Diagnostic Conversion to Mild Cognitive 71.\
    Impairment. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 65, 1152–1158 (2017).\
\
52. Farias, S. T. et al. The Measurement of Everyday Cognition (ECog): 72.\
    Revisions and Updates. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 35, 258 (2021).\
\
53. Rabin, L. A. et al. Subjective Cognitive Decline in Older Adults: An\
    Overview of Self-Report Measures Used Across 19 International 73.\
    Research Studies. J. Alzheimers Dis. 48, S63–S86 (2015).\
\
54. Leary, M. R., Kelly, K. M., Cottrell, C. A. & Schreindorfer, L. S.\
    Construct validity of the need to belong scale: mapping the 74.\
    nomological network. J. Pers. Assess. 95, 610–624 (2013).\
\
55. Zimet, G. D., Dahlem, N. W., Zimet, S. G. & Farley, G. K. The 75.\
    multidimensional scale of perceived social support. J. Pers. Assess.\
    52,30–41 (1988).\
\
56. Teunisse, A. K., Case, T. I., Fitness, J. & Sweller, N. I Should have\
    known better: development of a self-report measure of gullibility. Pers. Acknowledgements\
    Soc. Psychol. Bull. 46, 408–423 (2020). This work was supported by funding from the National Institute on Aging\
\
57. Niven, K., Totterdell, P., Stride, C. B. & Holman, D. Emotion regulation (R01-AG067011 to D.V.S., T32AG066598 to K.H.), a College of Liberal Arts\
    of others and self (EROS): the development and validation of a new Research Award (to D.V.S.), National Institute of Mental Health (R15-\
    individual difference measure. Curr. Psychol. 30,53–73 (2011). MH122927 to D.S.F.), and Adelphi University (Faculty Development Award\
\
58. Frederick, S. Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making. J. Econ. to D.S.F.). Publication of this article was funded in part by the Temple\
    Perspect. 19,25–42 (2005). University Libraries Open Access Publishing Fund. The funders had no role\
\
59. Thomson, K. S. & Oppenheimer, D. M. Investigating an alternate form in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or\
    of the cognitive reflection test. Judgment and Decis. Mak. 11,15 preparation of the manuscript.\
    (2016).\
\
60. Gotlib, I. H. & Joormann, J. Cognition and depression: current status Author contributions\
    and future directions. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 6, 285–312 (2010). Y.Y. contributed to formal analysis, visualization, and drafted the original\
\
61. Martin, R. C. et al. Neurocognitive predictors of financial capacity in manuscript, as well as participated in review and editing. K.H. contributed to\
    traumatic brain injury. J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 27, E81–E90 (2012). conceptualization and methodology, co-wrote the original draft, and\
\
\
events/data-visualizations/data-spotlight/2022/12/who-experiences-59. Sunderaraman, P., Cosentino, S., Lindgren, K., James, A. &\
Schultheis, M. T. An examination of financial capacity and\
Federal Trade Commission. Consumer Sentinel Network Data Book neuropsychological performance in chronic acquired brain injury\
(CABI). Brain Inj. 33, 991–1002 (2019).\
60\. Xiao, H., Jacobsen, A., Chen, Z. & Wang, Y. Detecting social-cognitive\
deficits after traumatic brain injury: an ALE meta-analysis of fMRI\
between financial decision-making and financial exploitation in older studies. Brain Inj. 31, 1331–1339 (2017).\
61\. Babbage, D. R. Research priorities for the assessment and treatment\
Derringer, J. A simple correction for non-independent tests. Preprint of emotion recognition difficulties in brain injury rehabilitation. Crit.\
Rev. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 26. [https://doi.org/10.1615/](https://doi.org/10.1615/)\
R Core Team (2023). R: A language and environment for statistical CritRevPhysRehabilMed.2014010533 (2014).\
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. 62. Cicerone, K. D. et al. Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation:\
systematic review of the literature from 2009 through 2014. Arch.\
Venables, W. N. & Ripley, B. D. Modern Applied Statistics with S, 4th Phys. Med. Rehabil. 100, 1515–1533 (2019).\
63\. Briggs, E. Gen Z is Extremely Online. [https://pro.morningconsult.com/](https://pro.morningconsult.com/)\
instant-intel/gen-z-social-media-usage (Morning Consult Pro, 2022).\
64\. Liedke, J., and Gottfried, J. Trust in social media is changing. Here’s\
how it breaks down by age. World Econ. Forum. [https://www](https://www/).\
Cantoni, E. & Ronchetti, E. A robust approach for skewed and heavy-weforum.org/stories/2022/11/social-media-adults-informationtailed outcomes in the analysis of health care expenditures. J. Health news-platforms/ (2022).\
65\. Ranson, J. W. A., Arnio, A. N. & Baumer, E. P. Extending research on\
neighborhoods and crime: an examination of mortgage fraud across\
chicago census tracts. J. Quant. Criminol. 35, 465–491 (2019).\
instead of the classical F-test in one-way ANOVA. rips 32, 13 (2019). 66. Alves, L. M. & Wilson, S. R. The Effects Of Loneliness On\
Fareri, D. S. et al. Age-related differences in ventral striatal and default Telemarketing Fraud Vulnerability Among Older Adults. J. Elder Abuse\
mode network function during reciprocated trust. NeuroImage 256, Negl. 20,63–85 (2008).\
67\. DeLiema, M. Using Mixed Methods to Identify the Characteristics of\
Ader, D. N. Developing the patient-reported outcomes measurement Older Fraud Victims. (Ph.D., University of Southern California, 2015).\
[https://www.proquest.com/docview/1705799725/abstract/](https://www.proquest.com/docview/1705799725/abstract/)\
Hays, R. D., Bjorner, J. B., Revicki, D. A., Spritzer, K. L. & Cella, D. 3484284AE4364062PQ/1.\
Development of physical and mental health summary scores from the 68. Lachs, M. S. & Han, S. D. Age-associated financial vulnerability: an\
emerging public health issue. Ann. Intern. Med. 163, 877–878 (2015).\
69\. Lee, J. & Geistfeld, L. V. Elderly consumers’ receptiveness to\
Farias, S. T. et al. The measurement of everyday cognition (ECog): telemarketing fraud. J. Public Policy Mark. 18, 208–217 (1999).\
scale development and psychometric properties. Neuropsychology 70. Lichtenberg, P. A., Gross, E. & Campbell, R. A short form of the\
Lichtenberg Financial Decision Rating Scale. Clin. Gerontol. 43,\
Farias, S. T. et al. Early Functional Limitations in Cognitively Normal 256–265 (2020).\
71\. Carstensen, L. L. The influence of a sense of time on human\
development. Science 312, 1913–1915 (2006).\
Farias, S. T. et al. The Measurement of Everyday Cognition (ECog): 72. Laumann, E. O., Leitsch, S. A. & Waite, L. J. Elder mistreatment in the\
Revisions and Updates. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 35, 258 (2021). United States: prevalence estimates from a nationally representative\
study. J. Gerontol. Ser. B 63, S248–S254 (2008).\
73\. Bailey, J., Taylor, L., Kingston, P. & Watts, G. Older adults and\
“scams”: evidence from the Mass Observation Archive. J. Adult Prot.\
23,57–69 (2021).\
74\. Jackson, S. L. A systematic review of financial exploitation measures\
in prevalence studies. J. Appl. Gerontol. 37, 1150–1188 (2018).\
75\. Gunther, J. Responding to the Pandemic-Era Uptick in Financial\
multidimensional scale of perceived social support. J. Pers. Assess. Exploitation. [https://www.napfa.org/conference-session/158/](https://www.napfa.org/conference-session/158/)\
112287 (2022).\
\
This work was supported by funding from the National Institute on Aging\
(R01-AG067011 to D.V.S., T32AG066598 to K.H.), a College of Liberal Arts\
Research Award (to D.V.S.), National Institute of Mental Health (R15-\
MH122927 to D.S.F.), and Adelphi University (Faculty Development Award\
to D.S.F.). Publication of this article was funded in part by the Temple\
University Libraries Open Access Publishing Fund. The funders had no role\
in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or\
preparation of the manuscript.\
\
* * *\
\
participated in review and editing. S.K. contributed to conceptualization,\
performed formal analysis, and participated in review and editing. R.M.L.\
contributed to formal analysis and review and editing. J.J. and T.G. contributed to conceptualization and review and editing. D.S.F. and D.V.S.\
contributed to conceptualization and methodology, provided supervision\
and project administration, participated in review and editing, and secured\
funding for the project.\
\
Competing interests\
The authors declare no competing interests.\
\
The authors declare no competing interests.\
\
Additional information\
Supplementary information The online version contains\
\
Supplementary information The online version contains\
supplementary material available at\
[https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271-025-00266-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271-025-00266-x).\
\
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to\
David V. Smith.\
\
Peer review information Communications Psychology thanks Stacey\
Wood and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the\
peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editors: Hannah Hao and Jennifer\
Bellingtier. A peer review file is available.\
\
Reprints and permissions information is available at\
[http://www.nature.com/reprints](http://www.nature.com/reprints)\
\
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to\
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.\
\
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons\
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,\
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long\
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,\
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes\
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are\
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated\
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the\
article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted\
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to\
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this\
licence, visit [http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).\
\
© The Author(s) 2025