The PREVENT-AD cohort: accelerating Alzheimer’s disease research and treatment in
Canada and beyond

1,2,3,4,5\* 1,2 1,2
AUTHORS: Sylvia Villeneuve, Judes Poirier, John C.S. Breitner, Jennifer Tremblay-

1,5
Mercier1, Jordana Remz1, Jean-Michel Raoult1, Yara Yakoub, Jonathan Gallego-

1,5 1,5 1,5 1,6,7
Rudolf, Ting Qiu, Alfonso Fajardo Valdez, Bery Mohammediyan, Mohammadali

1,5 1,5
Javanray, Amelie Metz, Safa Sanami8, Valentin Ourry1, Alfie Wearn9, Alexandre Pastor-

1,10 1,11 1,12
Bernier1, Manon Edde, Julie Gonneaud, Cherie Strikwerda-Brown, Christine L.

3,9,13 1,8,14 1,2,4
Tardif, Claudine J. Gauthier, Maxime Descoteaux10, Mahsa Dadar, Étienne Vachon-

1,16,17,18 6,7 1,2 1,2
Presseau, Andree-Ann Baril, Simon Ducharme, Maxime Montembeault, Maiya R.

1,3,9
Geddes, Jean-Paul Soucy3, Natasha Rajah19, Robert Laforce20,Christian Bocti21, Christos

23,24 2,3,9
Davatzikos22, Lune Bellec, Pedro Rosa-Neto, Sylvain Baillet3, Alan C. Evans3, D. Louis

3,9,13 2,4 25,26,27,28 25,26,29,30,31,32
Collins, M. Mallar Chakravarty, Kaj Blennow, Henrik Zetterberg, R.

1,2,3,9 1,24,33,34\* #
Nathan Spreng, Alexa Pichet Binette, & the PREVENT-AD Research Group

1. StoP-AD Centre, Douglas Mental Health University Institute, McGill University,
   Montréal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada

Montréal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada

2. Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 1A1, Canada

3. Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada


* * *

06. Research Center of the CIUSSS-NIM, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, Montreal, QC
    H4J 1C5, Canada

07. Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H3T
    1J4, Canada

08. Department of Physics, Concordia University, Montréal, QC H4B 1R6, Canada

09. Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 1A1,
    Canada

10. Faculté des sciences, Département d'informatique, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke,
    QC J1K 2R1, Canada

11. Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, INSERM, U1237, PhIND "Physiopathology and Imaging of
    Neurological Disorders", NeuroPresage Team, GIP Cyceron, 14032 Caen, France

12. School of Psychological Science, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western
    Australia 6009, Australia

13. Department Biomedical Engineering, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 2B4, Canada

14. Centre ÉPIC, Montreal Heart Institute, Montréal, QC H1T 1N6, Canada

15. School of Health, Concordia University, Montréal, QC H4B 1R6, Canada

16. Faculty of Dental Medicine and Oral Health Sciences, McGill University, Montreal, QC
    H3A 1G1, Canada

17. Alan Edwards Center for Research on Pain, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4,
    Canada


Montreal, QC H3G 2M1, Canada

* * *

19. Department of Psychology, Toronto Metropolitan University, Toronto, ON M5S 2E5,
    Canada

20. Clinique interdisciplinaire de mémoire, CHU de Québec affilié à l'Université Laval,
    Québec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada

21. Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
    Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5H3, Canada

22. AI2D Center for AI and Data Science for Integrated Diagnostics, University of
    Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

23. Psychology Department, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2V 2S9, Canada

24. Centre de Recherche de l’Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, Montréal, QC
    H3W 1W5, Canada

25. Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
    Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 431 39 Mölndal, Sweden

26. Clinical Neurochemistry Lab, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 43180 Mölndal, Sweden

27. Paris Brain Institute, ICM, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Sorbonne University, 75013 Paris,
    France

28. Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, University College London Institute of
    Neurology, London WC1E 6BT, UK

29. UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London NW1 3BT, UK


* * *

31. Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, InnoHK, 999077 Hong Kong, China

32. Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin School of
    Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53792, USA

33. Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H3C
    3J7, Canada

34. Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund
    University, 224 41 Lund, Sweden


\*Corresponding authors: Sylvia Villeneuve ( [sylvia.villeneuve@mcgill.ca](mailto:sylvia.villeneuve@mcgill.ca) ) and Alexa Pichet Binette

( [alexa.pichet.binette@umontreal.ca](mailto:alexa.pichet.binette@umontreal.ca))

Douglas Research Centre

6875 Boulevard LaSalle, Perry Pavillon, E-3417.1

H4H 1R3

# Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Pre-symptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel

Treatments for Alzheimer’s Disease (PREVENT-AD) program ( [https://douglas.research.mcgill.ca/stop-ad-centre](https://douglas.research.mcgill.ca/stop-ad-centre)). A complete

listing of the PREVENT-AD Research Group can be found at:

[https://preventad.loris.ca/acknowledgements/acknowledgements.php?date=\[2024-07-01\]](https://preventad.loris.ca/acknowledgements/acknowledgements.php?date=%5B2024-07-01%5D).

* * *

medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

ABSTRACT

The PREVENT-AD is an investigator-driven study that was created in 2011 and enrolled
cognitively normal older adults with a family history of sporadic AD. Participants are deeply
phenotyped and have now been followed annually for more than 12 years \[median follow-up 8.0\
years,SD 3.1\]. Multimodal MRI, genetic, neurosensory, clinical, cerebrospinal fluid and
cognitive data collected until 2017 on 348 participants who agreed to open sharing with the
neuroscience community were already available. We now share a new release including 6 years
of additional follow-up cognitive data, and additional MRI follow-ups, clinical progression, new
longitudinal behavioral and lifestyle measures (questionnaires, actigraphy), longitudinal AD
plasma biomarkers, amyloid-beta and tau PET, magnetoencephalography, as well as
neuroimaging analytic measures from all MRI modalities. We describe the PREVENT-AD
study, the data shared with the global research community as well as the model we created to
sustain longitudinal follow-ups while also allowing new innovative data collection.

* * *

1. HISTORY, GOVERNANCE AND DATA SHARING MODELS

The Centre for Studies on the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease (StoP-AD Centre, [www.centrestopad.com/](http://www.centrestopad.com/)) was created in 2010, at the Douglas Mental Health University Institute Research
Centre, under the leadership of Dr. John C.S. Breitner, MD, MPH, Dr. Judes Poirier, PhD, and
Dr. Pierre Etienne, MD as a 7-year $13.5M public-private partnership supported by McGill
University1. The current director of the Centre is Dr. Sylvia Villeneuve, PhD, and Dr. Judes
Poirier is Deputy Director. The main mission of the StoP-AD Centre is the pursuit of innovative
intersectoral studies and interventions in the preclinical, or asymptomatic, phase of Alzheimer's
disease (AD), with the goal of stopping or delaying the onset of the disease.

Figure 1: Flow chart of PREVENT-AD parti 1 medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

The primary resource of the StoP-AD Centre is the PResymptomatic EValuation of Experimental
or Novel Treatments for Alzheimer’s disease (PREVENT-AD) cohort, which includes
individuals cognitively unimpaired (CU) at the time of enrolment with a first-degree family
history of sporadic Alzheimer-like dementia. Having a family history of sporadic AD is known
to increase the risk of dementia by 2- to 3-fold2. These "at-risk" individuals undergo annual
detailed multimodal examinations across a diverse array of disease indicators, such as
neuropsychological evaluations, biofluid collection, and neuroimaging markers.

3\\mathrm{-f o0d^{2}}

To build the PREVENT-AD cohort, more than 1700 persons from the greater Montreal area
were screened between 2011 and 2017. Of these, 692 completed an on-site eligibility visit, 426
3
completed a baseline visit and 387 were included in the cohort (Figure 1). Participants needed
to have a parental history of sporadic Alzheimer-like dementia or multiple siblings affected by
the disease and be aged 60 years or older, or 55–59 years if within 15 years of the age of onset of
their affected relative. At the eligibility visit, the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) and
the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) were administered to exclude the presence of cognitive
impairment. A very small portion of individuals who had a MoCA lower than 26 or a CDR
higher than 0 were enrolled after an exhaustive neuropsychological evaluation performed by a
clinician that confirmed normal cognition. The Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of
4
Neuropsychological Status (RBANS) was performed at baseline, and participants with scores
below normative values also needed to undergo an exhaustive neuropsychological evaluation to
confirm normal cognition otherwise they were excluded from the study. The full list of
1,3
inclusion/exclusion criteria can be found in supplementary Table 1. Among the 387

1^{1,3} participants included in the PREVENT-AD study, 367 completed at least one follow-up visit
(95%) and 306 (79%) were still followed more than 10 years later.

The mean age at baseline of the participants was 63 years (SD=5.2 years), 72% were female,
38% were APOE4 carriers, and 98% were White (supplementary Table 2). 87% had French as
a mother tongue and 74% reported being bilingual or multilingual. Between 2011-2017,
corresponding to Phase 1 of data acquisition, participants were seen annually and data collected
included MRI, cognitive, neurosensory (olfactory and auditory processes) and biofluid (plasma,
3
urine and cerebrospinal fluid \[CSF\]). Two pharmacological trials were also completed. A 2-year
double-masked pharmaco-prevention trial (naproxen vs placebo), that enrolled 195 of the 387
PREVENT-AD participants was conducted between November 2011 and March 2017
5
(NCT02702817). The trial provided no conclusive evidence for superiority of naproxen over
placebo. A second trial targeting apolipoprotein E (APOE) production was started in 2016, but
rapidly terminated as it did not reach its short-term goals (NCT02707458). Lumbar punctures
(LP) in the PREVENT-AD cohort were optional and initially proposed only to participants
enrolled in the naproxen trial, before being proposed to the full cohort in 2016.

In November 2017, the McGill University funding period concluded, forcing a restructuring of
the StoP-AD Centre's operations and governance. At that time, 341 participants were still
followed. We moved from a top-down data collection structure to a bottom-up structure where
collaborating investigators could propose innovative projects to be conducted with PREVENT-
AD participants while also supporting acquisition of the “core” data collected in the Phase 1 (e.g.
RBANS), to balance continuity and innovation. The proposed projects were carefully reviewed medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

to ensure they were in line with the Centre’s main objectives and did not overburden the
participants.

During this restructuring, we also received support from the Canadian Open Neuroscience
Platform (CONP) to share PREVENT-AD data with the global research community. When
initially enrolled in the cohort, participants consented to their data being used by StoP-AD
investigators and collaborators only. We therefore retrospectively consented participants for their
data to be shared with neuroscience researchers worldwide. We were able to reach 373 of the
387 PREVENT-AD participants among which 348 (93% of those reached) agreed to such
sharing. The first open release of PREVENT-AD data as well as the steps needed to move from a
traditional data sharing model to a global sharing model have been described in detail
previously3.

The overarching goal of this manuscript is to describe the main data available to PREVENT-AD
investigators and to researchers worldwide, with a focus on the data collected in the second
phase of data acquisition (overview in Figure 2). This second phase of data acquisition includes
6 years of additional follow-up cognitive data, and additional MRI follow-ups, clinical
progression, new longitudinal behavioral and lifestyle measures (questionnaires, actigraphy),
longitudinal AD plasma biomarkers, amyloid-beta (Ab) and tau PET, magnetoencephalography,
as well as neuroimaging analytic measures from all MRI modalities. Figure 3A provides a
timeline of the main in-person data collected on PREVENT-AD participants at the StoP-AD
Centre, and Figure 3B summarizes the data collected across baseline and follow-up visits for all
participants. The data of the 348 participants who consented to global sharing can be accessed by faculty researchers and physicians at [https://registeredpreventad.loris.ca](https://registeredpreventad.loris.ca/) after accepting the terms
of use, such as not trying to re-identify participants.

A Data overview

B Neuroimaging analytic measures

C Behavioral questionnaires

Figure 2: Main data available in the Data Shearing Repository.
Overview of all modalities available (A). Neuroimaging analytic measures (B). The cognitive

Figure 2: Main data available in the Data Shearing Repository.
Overview of all modalities available (A). Neuroimaging analytic measures (B). The cognitive
assessment includes global and specific neuropsychological tests. Behavioral questionnaires (C).
Fluid analytic measures (D).
Abbreviations: Aβ, Amyloid-beta; PET, positron emission tomography; MEG,

Abbreviations: Aβ, Amyloid-beta; PET, positron emission tomography; MEG,
magnetoencephalography; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PD,
proton density; MTsat, magnetization transfer saturation; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; FA,
fractional anisotropy; MD, mean diffusivity; AD, axial diffusivity; RD, radial diffusivity; SUVR,
standardized uptake value ratio; p, phosphorylated; NfL, neurofilament light; GFAP, glial
fibrillary acidic protein; APOE, Apolipoprotein E; PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin
type 9; G-CSF, granulocyte colony stimulating factor; IL, interleukin; VEGF, vascular endothelial
growth factor.

* * *

medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

A

Cognition

Imaging

Fluid biomarkers (analytic values)

B shared given that all tasks have not been completed, and we could not compute index scores.
2011 is not shown given that only enrolment visits were conducted that year.
Abbreviations: RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological status;
RAVLT, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test; TMT, Trail Making Test; MRI, magnetic resonance
imaging; PET, positron emission tomography; MEG, magnetoencephalography; CSF,
cerebrospinal fluid; EN, enrolment; BL, baseline.

2. PHASES OF DATA ACQUISITION

Demographic, anthropometric and genetic (including APOE genotype) information were
collected at baseline. Baseline and longitudinal cognition were evaluated using the RBANS,
which consists of 12 subtests (list learning, story learning, figure copy, line orientation, picture
naming, semantic fluency, digit span, coding, list recall, list recognition, story recall, figure
recall) that yield an index score for each of five specific cognitive domains (immediate memory,
delayed memory, language, attention and visuospatial capacities) and a global score. The Eightitem Informant Interview to Differentiate Aging and Dementia (AD8) was assessed at baseline
and annual visits up to November 2017 to evaluate possible mild dementia. Biofluid (blood,
urine at each visit; CSF was optional) and sensory (olfactory and auditory) information were also
collected. Multi-modal MRI was performed on an annual basis. Most MRI sequences (3T) were
harmonized with the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) protocol6 to ease
interoperability between cohorts and included T1-weighted, T2\*-weighted, fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, diffusion MRI, arterial spin labeling (ASL) and resting-state
functional (f)MRI data acquired with a Siemens Tim Trio with a standard 12-channel coil
7-14
(Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). An episodic memory fMRI task (designed
by Dr. Natasha Rajah, PhD) was also performed for all participants except the ones enrolled after
15-18
June 2016. For participants enrolled after June 2016 until November 2017, the task fMRI

\\operatorname{T r}^{\*}

2216^{15-18} medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

was replaced by an MP2RAGE for quantitative T1 maps19, a multi-echo gradient echo for T2\*
maps, and a high in-plane resolution T2-weighted image to assess brain microstructure and
segment hippocampal subfields, respectively, and a 32-channel coil was used (Table 1 and
supplementary Table 3). Finally, except when enrolled in the Naproxen clinical trial,
participants who developed mild cognitive impairment (MCI) during the follow-up visits were
excluded from the study. Ten participants were excluded between 2012 and 2017.

Phase 2

The RBANS was (and is) still collected every year, but other assessments became dependent on
investigator-driven project grant funds. As such, MRI scans, blood draws and LPs were done, but
not necessarily performed on all participants and/or systematically every year. Furthermore,
when we resumed MRI scanning in 2019 the 3T Siemens Tim Trio MRI scanner was upgraded
to a Prisma Fit and our MRI protocol was updated. Amidst the protocol updates, the fMRI
changed from single- to multi-echo, the diffusion MRI from single shell to multi-shell
(supplementary Table 4).

* * *

Table 1. Neuroimaging raw data and analytical-derived measures in PREVENT-AD covering November 2011 to December 2023.
Image type Participants Visits Investigator Analytical neuroimaging-derived measures Investigator

| Image type | Participants Internal (Shared) | Visits Internal (Shared) | Investigator group (Acquisition) | Analytical neuroimaging-derived measures | Investigator group (Analytic measures) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Magnetic resonance imaging |  |  |  |  |  |
| T1-weighted (MPRAGE) | 386(347) | 2264(2081) | StoP-AD Centre | Regional cortical volume, thickness, surface area,and subcortical volume, quantified using FreeSurfer Machine learning derived measures: brain parcellations and indices of aging and AD using NiChart | S. Villeneuve C.Davatzikos |
| T2-weighted | 304(286) | 597(565) | StoP-AD Centre | WMH volume quantified using a random forests machine learning algorithm | M.Dadar |
| Diffusion MRI | 385(346) | 1465(1302) | StoP-AD Centre | Diffusion properties of white matter tracts quantified using TractoFlow,RBXFlow and Tractometry Flow | M.Descoteaux |
| Resting-state fMRI | 385(346) | 1874(1674) | StoP-AD Centre | Connectome matrices of functional parcellations(post-processing offMRIPrep outputs) | S.Villeneuve |
| FLAIR | 383(344) | 1056(972) | StoP-AD Centre | WMH volume quantified using a random forests machine learning algorithm | M.Dadar |
| Task fMRI | 331(294) | 1422(991) | StoP-AD Centre | N/A(Onset vector files available) | N.Rajah |
| T2\*-weighted | 381(343) | 1324(1261) | StoP-AD Centre | N/A | N/A |
| Arterial spin labeling | 381(343) | 1243(1137) | StoP-AD Centre | Cerebral blood flow quantification usingFSL | C.Gauthier |
| Positron emission tomography |  |  |  |  |  |
| \[18F\]NAV4694(Aβ) | 243(232) | 243(232) | S. Villeneuve | Standardized uptake value ratio(SUVR) in DK atlas regions using the whole cerebellum and the cerebellum grey matter as reference regions | S.Villeneuve |
| \[18F\]flortaucipir(tau) | 240(229) | 240(229) | S. Villeneuve | SUVR in DK atlas regions using the inferior grey cerebellum as reference region | S.Villeneuve |
| Magnetoencephalography |  |  |  |  |  |
| Resting-state MEG | 124(114) | 124(114) | S. Villeneuve | Relative spectral power density estimates ofdelta,theta,alpha,beta,gamma1and gamma2 frequency bands across cortical regions of theDKatlas | S.Baillet |

Abbreviations: DK, Desikan-Killiany; FLAIR, Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; f, functional; MPRAGE, Magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo;
SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio; WMH, white matter hyperintensity.

* * *

New investigator-driven data types also began to be collected towards the end of 2016. The
novel measures collected in the second phase of data acquisition include 1) additional clinical
and experimental cognitive tasks, 2) behavioral data including self-reported questionnaires and
objective sleep measures, 3) new MRI sequences, 4) amyloid-beta (Ab) and tau positron
emission tomography (PET) and 5) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) data. Since 2016 we
also now systematically review the cognitive performance of all participants and participants
who develop MCI or dementia are no longer excluded. As of December 2023, 105 (27%) of the
387 PREVENT-AD participants were classified as having MCI at their latest follow-up time
points among which some later received a diagnosis of dementia.

The second phase of data collection and sharing was supported by 15 project grants, two
platform grants, philanthropic donations and a Canada Foundation for Innovation award, see the
full list in the Acknowledgments section.

3. DATA

Cognitive data

A total of 2662 RBANS assessments have been collected at the StoP-AD Centre between 2012
and 2023 and 2493 of these assessments, representing the visits of the 348 participants who
retrospectively agreed to data sharing, are now available to the global research community via
the Data Sharing Repository ( [https://registeredpreventad.loris.ca](https://registeredpreventad.loris.ca/)). RBANS was completed at all
visits for all participants except during the COVID-19 pandemic, and most participants have now
been followed for 8 years (median follow-up 8.0 years, mean 7.1, standard deviation 3.1, range
0-11.3 years). Starting in August 2017, three new neuropsychological tests were added: the Rey medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT), Trail Making Test (TMT) and Color-Word
Interference Test of the Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS) on a subset of
participants and then on the full cohort. Further details on each of these tests are summarized in
Table 2.

* * *

Table 2. Cognitive and behavioral tasks and questionnaires
Participants Visits

|  | Participants Internal (Shared) | Visits Internal (Shared) | Domain Assessed | Investigator group |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Cognitive and behavioral tasks |  |  |  |  |
| RBANS | 387(348) | 2662(2493) | Immediate Memory;DelayedMemory;Visuospatial/ Constructional;Language;Attention;Global cognition(Total score) | StoP-ADCentre |
| RAVLT | 318(299) | 1096(1040) | Immediate and delayed verbal memory | S. Villeneuve |
| Trail Making Test | 318(299) | 1107(1047) | Speed;Executive function(cognitive flexibility) | S. Villeneuve |
| Color-Word Interference | 318(299) | 1104(1044) | Speed;Executive function(inhibitory control and flexibility) | S. Villeneuve |
| Self-reported questionnaires |  |  |  |  |
| Lifestyle |  |  |  |  |
| Lifetime cognitive activity | 309(290) | 532(506) | Cognitive activity at different life epoch | S. Villeneuve |
| Lifetime Total Physical Activity | 306(279) | 519(435) | Number of hours of physical activity per year by category | S. Villeneuve |
| Physical Health |  |  |  |  |
| McGill Pain Questionnaire - Short Version | 338(315) | 799(754) | Pain duration and intensity | E.Vachon-Presseau |
| Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index | 338(315) | 797(753) | Sleep quality over a one-month time interval | S. Villeneuve |
| Epworth Sleepiness Scale | 338(315) | 795(751) | Daytime sleepiness | S. Villeneuve |
| Psycho-affective measures |  |  |  |  |
| Geriatric Depression Scale - Short Version | 339(316) | 796(752) | Depressive symptoms over a week | S. Villeneuve |
| Geriatric Anxiety Inventory | 339(316) | 798(753) | Anxiety symptoms over a week | S. Villeneuve |
| DASS | 339(316) | 796(752) | Stress symptoms over a week | S. Villeneuve |
| Apathy Evaluation Scale | 339(316) | 797(751) | Apathy symptoms in the past 4 weeks | S. Villeneuve |
| Personality traits |  |  |  |  |
| Big Five Inventory | 337(314) | 578(543) | Personality(Neuroticism,Openness,Extraversion,Agreeableness, Conscientiousness) | S. Villeneuve |
| Cognitive well-being |  |  |  |  |
| Perseverative Thinking | 339(316) | 800(754) | Repetitive negative thinking | N.Marchant |
| Life Orientation Test | 311(292) | 535(508) | Optimism | S. Villeneuve |
| Purpose in Life | 249(238) | 249(238) | Psychological well-being | S. Villeneuve |
| Five-Facet Mindfulness | 245(234) | 245(234) | Mindfulness | S. Villeneuve |
| Everyday Cognition | 326(304) | 546(512) | Memory,Language and Executive Functioning | S. Villeneuve |
| Subjective cognitive complaint | 326(304) | 546(512) | Cognitive complaint | S. Villeneuve |
| Social health questions | 337(314) | 580(546) | Social life | S. Villeneuve |

Abbreviations: DASS, Stress Scale from the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (Only Stress scale was assessed); RAVLT, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test;
RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status.

* * *

medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Clinical progression

To evaluate clinical progression, we reviewed the cognitive evaluations, blind to genetics,
imaging and biomarker information, of participants who had a main cognitive complaint or who

imaging and biomarker information, of participants who had a main cognitive complaint or who
performed below 1.5 standard deviations in one of the RBANS domains or two sub-tests of the
RAVLT20. First, trained research staff identified all participants with a main cognitive complaint
or who performed below the norms on the RBANS and/or the RAVLT. Then, longitudinal
cognitive information of these participants, including all available cognitive time points, were
reviewed by two neuropsychologists. Participants who were suspected to have developed MCI
based on the neuropsychologist review were then discussed in multidisciplinary consensus
meetings with a cognitive neurologist, neuropsychiatrist and the two neuropsychologists. The

imaging and biomarker information, of participants who had a main cognitive complaint or who
performed below 1.5 standard deviations in one of the RBANS domains or two sub-tests of the
. First, trained research staff identified all participants with a main cognitive complaint
or who performed below the norms on the RBANS and/or the RAVLT. Then, longitudinal
cognitive information of these participants, including all available cognitive time points, were
reviewed by two neuropsychologists. Participants who were suspected to have developed MCI
based on the neuropsychologist review were then discussed in multidisciplinary consensus
meetings with a cognitive neurologist, neuropsychiatrist and the two neuropsychologists. The

meetings with a cognitive neurologist, neuropsychiatrist and the two neuropsychologists. The
classification of CU vs MCI was based on all available time points blind to blind to genetics,

classification of CU vs MCI was based on all available time points blind to blind to genetics,

classification of CU vs MCI was based on all available time points blind to blind to genetics,

imaging and biomarker information. The MCI subtype (amnestic or non-amnestic, single or

multidomain) was also determined during the consensus meetings. Once a participant was
classified as MCI, this label was confirmed at every subsequent visit, meaning that some
participants classified as MCI at one visit might revert to be considered as CU at a subsequent
visit. Importantly, because the MCI classification was made blind to biomarker information,

multidomain) was also determined during the consensus meetings. Once a participant was
classified as MCI, this label was confirmed at every subsequent visit, meaning that some
participants classified as MCI at one visit might revert to be considered as CU at a subsequent
visit. Importantly, because the MCI classification was made blind to biomarker information,

visit. Importantly, because the MCI classification was made blind to biomarker information,
individuals classified as MCI do not necessarily have AD. Furthermore, most of the participants
(66%) with MCI still had a CDR of 0, suggesting that our MCI classification includes

* * *

CSV file reporting the CDR score, when available, as well as the latest clinical status of the
participants, based on non-research information (clinical diagnosis when available or information
from caregiver for dementia status) not necessarily blind to biomarker status is also available.
110 participants are classified as having MCI at a minimum of one time point among which 102
are included in the Data Sharing Repository.

Behavioral data

Personality, lifestyle, mood, and behavioral questionnaires were introduced in 2016 as part of an
investigator-led project with the aim of evaluating the impact of modifiable risk factors on AD
21-27
pathology and cognitive decline. The questionnaires cover aspects related to cognitive and
physical activity, neuropsychiatric symptoms, personality traits, pain, outlook on life and
subjective cognitive complaints (Table 2). These questionnaires were mainly collected using
online platforms and were not necessarily obtained at the same time as the other assessments.
Questionnaires are available on most participants and have been administered at several time
points.

* * *

medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

sleep diaries have not been curated for global sharing). Actigraphy data was processed through
the Actiware software (version 6.0) with a medium detection threshold for sensitivity of 40
activity counts/per min24. The data were collected using 15-second epochs. Time in bed detected
by the Actiware algorithm was corrected when needed using information reported in the
participants’ sleep diaries. For each sleep characteristic derived from complete nights of
actigraphy, data provided include the day-to-day variability (standard deviation between
actigraphy days) and the average over the week of actigraphy. Sleep characteristics include sleep
duration (min), time in bed (min), sleep onset latency (min), sleep efficiency (%, sleep
duration/time in bed), wake after sleep onset (min), and sleep fragmentation index (percent of
mobile + immobile <1 min bouts over the sleep period representing restlessness, as defined by
the Actiware algorithm).

Neuroimaging data

MRI: MRI acquisition resumed in January 2019. Throughout the study, the same MRI scanner
was used. The difference between the first and second Phase of data acquisition was that the
scanner had been upgraded to a Prisma Fit and the 32-channel head coil was used exclusively.
All scans were performed at the Cerebral Imaging Center of the Douglas Mental Health
3 3
University Institute. Sequences acquired include 1mm 3D T1-weighted MPRAGE, 0.6mm 3D
3
T2-weighted SPACE, 3mm resting-state multi-echo functional MRI, 1x1x3mm 3D FLAIR, and
multi-shell diffusion imaging (Table 1, supplementary Table 4). These new MRI are available
25
for 284 participants among which 206 participants underwent more than one MRI between 19
and 2023 (after the upgrade, FLAIR data were only acquired in 2019-2020). One should consider
that some harmonization or normalization steps may be needed if both Phase 1 and Phase 2 MRI
data are used in the same analysis given that some sequences were slightly upgraded, but the medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

single-site design of our study reduces confounding variability often present in larger studies. All
MRIs are available in NIfTI file formats, organized according to the Brain Imaging Data Structure
(BIDS) standard28. Anatomical images were defaced using a defacing algorithm shown to not
significantly affect data processing outcomes29. This procedure is the same as the one applied to
the Stage 1 MRI data, and every image was visually reviewed to ensure proper defacing. Single
packages containing either all MRI or only anatomical images are available for download for this
second phase of data acquisition.

PET: Newly available data also include Ab (n=232) and tau (n=229) cross-sectional PET scans
collected between 2017 and 2023. Ab and tau PET scans were acquired on two consecutive days
using a brain-dedicated Siemens/CTI high-resolution research tomograph (HRRT) at the
McConnell Brain Imaging Centre of the Montreal Neurological Institute. This scanner provides
high spatial resolution compared to most other scanners, with 2.4 mm at the center of the field of
view. For Ab, six 5-minute frames were acquired 40-70 minutes after the injection of 220 MBq
18
(6 mCi) of \[ F\]NAV4694, whereas for tau four 5-minute frames were obtained 80-100 minutes
18
after injecting an average of 370 MBq (10 mCi) of \[ F\]Flortaucipir30. We provide the raw PET
images and the SUVR images in NIfTI for both tracers, organized according to the BIDS
structure, which can all be downloaded in a zip file from the data repository. Qualitative control
was done on the PET data to ensure that the MRI-PET registration was good.

* * *

Coquitlam, BC, Canada) with 275 first-order axial gradiometer coils and 26 MEG reference
sensors31. The raw MEG and T1-weighted MRI scans are available from the Open MEG Archive
(OMEGA) repository32. Our objective is to eventually have them also available on the
PREVENT-AD data repository.

4. ANALYTIC MEASURES

Another innovation of the current release is the inclusion of analytic neuroimaging measures (or
data derivatives) computed by imaging experts who preprocessed and analyzed the data and
returned the numeric values to the StoP-AD Centre to be shared in CSV files (Table 1).

MRI: The analytic measures include: 1) morphometric measurements of cortical thickness and
brain volumes extracted from structural T1w-images in the Desikan-Killiany atlas using
FreeSurfer33, 2) brain parcellations, and machine learning indices of aging and AD were
extracted via the NiChart software ( [https://neuroimagingchart.com](https://neuroimagingchart.com/)), 2) brain-wide functional
connectivity matrices obtained across cortical regions of the Schaefer atlas (200 and 400
34
parcels) as well as within and between the 7 Yeo networks (i.e., visual, sensorimotor, dorsal
attention, ventral attention, limbic, frontoparietal and default mode network) from resting-state
timeseries of fMRI data preprocessed using fMRIPrep35, 3) diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)
measures in 52 white matter bundles reconstructed from whole-brain tractograms computed from
diffusion MRI (dMRI) data analyzed using the SCIL Tractoflow pipelines36, 4) white matter
hyperintensity volumes in the whole brain and in each lobe as derived from T1w, T2w and
FLAIR images that underwent a nonlinear automatic classification37 and 5) regional measures of medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

cerebral blood flow in ml blood/100g tissue/min obtained from ASL sequences using BASIL
from FSL and averaged over the regions of the Desikan-Killiany atlas.

PET: We now share standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) pre-processed using a standard inhouse developed pipeline ( [https://github.com/villeneuvelab/vlpp](https://github.com/villeneuvelab/vlpp)) that is based on the ADNI
30,33
pipeline. Briefly, Aβ- and tau-PET image frames were realigned, averaged and registered to
the T1-weighted scan of each participant, which had been segmented according to the Desikan-
Killiany atlas using FreeSurfer. SUVR images were obtained by dividing the signal uptake at
each voxel by the average signal obtained from a reference region (i.e., the whole cerebellum for
38,39
Ab PET and the inferior cerebellum grey matter for tau-PET). We provide Aβ and tau PET
SUVR values across the cortical regions of the Desikan-Killiany atlas. We also provide the
global Aβ PET Centiloid values, which represent standardized data based on a 0-100 scale where
0 represents the average binding in young controls and 100 represents the average binding in
patients with AD dementia40.

MEG: Time series were filtered to remove low-frequency drifts and DC-offset (high-pass set at
33
0.3Hz) and power-line noise (notch filter set at 60Hz and subsequent harmonics). Signal space
projectors were computed to remove physiological artifacts related to cardiac activity and eyeblinks. Source imaging was applied to the preprocessed MEG data using dynamic statistical
parametric mapping constrained to the cortical surface. Spectral power densities were computed
for each 4-second epoch of the reconstructed time series from each vertex of the cortical surface.
These were then averaged in the frequency domain to produce cortical maps of frequencyspecific brain activity in the delta (2-4 Hz), theta (5-7 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), beta (13-30 Hz),
gamma1 (30-60 Hz) and gamma2 (60-90 Hz) range, which were then normalized to the total medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

spectral power to produce relative power estimates. Finally, these relative power estimates were
averaged across the vertices comprising across the cortical regions of the Desikan-Killiany atlas
parcellation. The analytical measures (regional relative spectral power estimates for each of the
six frequencies) of the 98 participants’ data (out of 114 total) that passed quality control can be
found in the Data Sharing Repository.

Biofluid measures

Plasma and CSF biomarkers: Another important strength of this release is the incorporation of
novel plasma markers including Aβ1-40, Aβ1-42, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP),
neurofilament light (NfL), p-tau181, p-tau231 and p-tau217 that were part of an international
collaboration with University of Gothenburg (Table 3). Plasma Aβ1-40, Aβ1-42, GFAP, and NfL
chain from 1350 (1257 shared) time points were analyzed and quantified using the commercial
30
Neurology 4-plex E kit (503105; Quanterix). Plasma p-tau181 and p-tau231 from 1314 (1224
shared) time points were analyzed and quantified using in-house Single molecule array (Simoa)
41,42
assays developed at University of Gothenburg. Plasma p-tau217 concentration was measured
from samples collected at three timepoints, and samples were analyzed using an in-house Simoa
assay43 with overall repeatability and intermediate precision of < 10% for the biomarker
measurement. Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 CSF measured using Lumipulse G automated immunoassay44
48
and CSF p-tau217 measured using the same method as plasma p-tau217 are also available to
researchers worldwide.

\\mathrm{A B} _{1\_44,\ {\\mathrm A A}_{1\_42}}

\\mathrm{A}\\mathrm{B} _{1\_40},\\mathrm{A}\\mathrm{B}_{1\_42},

\\mathrm{A}\\beta\_{1}

\\mathbf{A}\\boldsymbol\_{1-42}

* * *

Table 3. Analytical fluid-derived measures in PREVENT-AD covering November 2011 to December 2023.
Participants Visits

| Biofluid analytes | Participants Internal(Shared) | Visits Internal(Shared) | Assay | Investigator group |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) |  |  |  |  |
| Aβ1-42 | 168(161) | 496(479) | ELISA(Innotest,Fujirebio) | J.Poirier |
| p-tau181,Total-tau | 169(161) | 498(480) | ELISA(Innotest,Fujirebio) | J.Poirier |
| ApoE | 104(98) | 343(357) | Luminex immunoassay(Milliplex APOMAG-62k,EMD-Millipore) | J.Poirier |
| PCSK9 | 100(95) | 172(164) | ELISA(Quantikine,R&D Systems) | J.Poirier |
| G-CSF,IL-15,IL-8 | 103(98) | 335(324) | Luminex immunoassay(Milliplex,EMD-Millipore) | J.Poirier |
| VEGF | 103(98) | 310(301) | Luminex immunoassay(Milliplex,EMD-Millipore) | J.Poirier |
| Aβ1-40,Aβ1-42 | 103(98) | 116(110) | Automated chemiluminescent immunoassay(Lumipulse G,Fujirebio) | K.Blennow,H.Zetterberg |
| p-tau217 | 183(174) | 203(193) | In-house Simoa assay developed at University of Gothenburg | K.Blennow,H.Zetterberg |
| Proteomics(SomaScan 7K) | 69(67) | 69(67) | High-throughput aptamer-based proteomics assay(SomaScan 7K,SomaLogic) | J.Poirier |
| Plasma |  |  |  |  |
| Aβ1-40,Aβ1-42,GFAP,NfL | 373(338) | 1350(1257) | Simoa assay(Neurology4-plex E,lot 503105,Quanterix) | K.Blennow,H.Zetterberg |
| p-tau181,p-tau231 | 369(336†) | 1314(1224) | In-house Simoa assay developed at University of Gothenburg | K.Blennow,H.Zetterberg |
| p-tau217 | 382(346) | 952(877) | In-house Simoa assay developed at University of Gothenburg | K.Blennow,H.Zetterberg |

\\mathrm{A}\\mathsf\_{1-42}

\\mathsf{A B} _{1\_44,\ }mathsf A A B_{1\_4\ 2}

\\mathrm{A B} _{1\ 44,\ {\\mathrm A}}\ \ {\ }_{1\\cdot42,,}

†n=335 for p-tau181
Abbreviations: Amyloid-beta (Aβ), Apolipoprotein E (ApoE), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), granulocyte

†n=335 for p-tau181
Abbreviations: Amyloid-beta (Aβ), Apolipoprotein E (ApoE), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), granulocyte
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), interleukin (IL), neurofilament light (NfL), phosphorylated (p), proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), single
molecular array (Simoa), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)

* * *

medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

S2 and S3; based on the observed signal to noise ratio in technical replicates and samples. This
division was done to avoid combining features with different levels of protein signal for
additional normalization steps. Median normalization was then performed to remove other assay

additional normalization steps. Median normalization was then performed to remove other assay
biases such as protein concentration, pipetting variation, variation in reagent concentrations, and
assay timing among others45

additional normalization steps. Median normalization was then performed to remove other assay
biases such as protein concentration, pipetting variation, variation in reagent concentrations, and
assay timing among others45. Finally, normalization to a reference was performed on individual

assay timing among others45. Finally, normalization to a reference was performed on individual
samples to account for additional technical variance as well as biological variance. This

samples to account for additional technical variance as well as biological variance. This
normalization step was performed using iterative Adaptive Normalization by Maximum
Likelihood, a modification of median normalization, until convergence was reached. Additional
details on normalization procedures are documented in SomaLogic’s technical note46

samples to account for additional technical variance as well as biological variance. This
normalization step was performed using iterative Adaptive Normalization by Maximum
Likelihood, a modification of median normalization, until convergence was reached. Additional
details on normalization procedures are documented in SomaLogic’s technical note46.

Genetics

In addition to providing APOE genotype, we are now providing the risk/protective
polymorphisms of the 74 genes that have been formally associated with late-onset AD in the
47
large GWAS analyses performed by Bellenguez et al. in 2022. Automated DNA extraction
from buffy coat samples was performed using the QIAsymphony DNA mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany). Genotyping was performed using the Omni2.5-8 BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego,
CA, USA). PLINK ( [http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/purcell/plink/](http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/purcell/plink/)) was used to filter gender
mismatches, filter missingness at sample-level (< 5%) and SNP-level (< 5%), assess sample heterozygosity and filter SNPs in Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium (p>0.001). Only post-imputed
SNPs with an info score > 0.7 were kept48. These data are available for 294 participants.

5. BIOMARKERS AND CLINICAL TRAJECTORIES OF PREVENT-AD PARTICIPANTS

The PREVENT-AD cohort has enabled many studies that augmented our understanding of the
preclinical phase of the disease as well as its prevention. These studies have also highlighted the
complexities of disease progression and validate the use of biomarkers to identify individuals
who have entered the preclinical phase of the disease. As of January 2025, at least 86 scientific
publications have featured data from PREVENT-AD, although this number may be larger
considering that we originally did not ask open users to add “for the PREVENT-AD Research
Group” in the author line of their publications, making the publications using the open datasets
difficult to track.

A focus of the phase 2 of data acquisition is the in-vivo measures of Aβ and tau using both fluid
and imaging biomarkers. In 2022, two multi-cohort longitudinal studies, including one using
PREVENT-AD data, showed that half of CU individuals identified as being abnormal on both
Aβ (A+) and tau (T+) PET biomarkers developed MCI or dementia when followed for a mean of
20,49
3.5 years. Individuals only positive on the Aβ scan (A+T-) were not at increased risk of
developing MCI or dementia when compared to A-T- individuals. Using additional follow-up
data collected in the phase 2 of data acquisition, we found that with 2.4 years longer of followup, 100% of PREVENT-AD participants who were A+T+ in this first publication20 progressed to
MCI or dementia during the additional follow-up50 (Figure 4). Importantly, in the A+T- group,
the percentage of progressors to MCI went from 9% to 42% with additional follow-up,
suggesting that many A+T- PET individuals are on the path of AD dementia and probably

\\mathsf{A}\\mathsf accumulate tau tangles over time, even if they do not yet show high uptake on tau PET scans
early on51. Similar results were found when using CSF and plasma p-tau217, as most
PREVENT-AD participants with abnormal p-tau217 values progressed from CU to MCI within a
10-year window50. These results are concrete examples of the richness of the PREVENT-AD
follow-ups as well as the predictive value of the biomarkers used. They also stress the fact that
AD is a progressive disease, and that the length of follow-up can dramatically change the
interpretation of the results.

Figure 4. Clinical status profiles and progression in the PREVENT-AD cohort
Percentage of clinical progression (mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia) across Ab
and tau PET biomarker profiles. The first graph is data as reported in Strikwerda-Brown et al
(2022), JAMA Neurology (left) and the second is after an additional 2.4 years of follow-up
(right) (n=128).
Abbreviations: CU: cognitively unimpaired older adults; MCI: mild cognitive impairment;

In pursuit of the StoP-AD Centre’s aim to find ways to delay the onset of AD, we added many
questionnaires in 2016 to assess the impact of lifestyle factors, behavior and personality traits,
alone or in combination, on AD risk and progression, with the ultimate goal to provide empirical
22,52
evidence that could support new preventive interventions. Lower education, sleep

* * *

24,25
characteristics, untreated vascular diseases53 high neuroticism22, high perseverative negative
thinking23 and lower mindfulness traits21 are all factors that have been associated with Aβ and/or
tau in the PREVENT-AD study. Behavior and lifestyle factors in midlife and late-life, such as
physical activity, cognitive activity, healthy diet, and social activity engagement have also been
26,27,54-57
associated with brain integrity and cognitive trajectories, stressing the need for
multimodal preventive interventions.

One novelty of Phase 2 is the addition of MEG, a neuroimaging modality that is rarely acquired
in large longitudinal AD studies. We used the MEG data across multiple projects to investigate
the relationship between neurophysiological alterations, AD pathology, and neurotransmitter
58-61
systems . Our findings show that early Aβ accumulation accelerates cortical
neurophysiology, while the presence of medial temporal tau pathology shifts activity toward
slower oscillatory states, which are associated with cognitive decline31. We further identified that
these neurophysiological changes align topographically with key neurotransmitter systems,
particularly cholinergic, serotonergic, and dopaminergic pathways, and that Aβ preferentially
deposits along neurochemical boundaries62. These results provide insight into the interplay
between neurophysiology, pathology, and neurochemistry in preclinical AD, with implications
for early detection and pharmacotherapeutic strategies.

* * *

medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

neurodevelopment and terminal remodeling, was found to increase progressively in CU
individuals before decreasing in individuals with cognitive impairment48.

PREVENT-AD data have also served the field of neuroscience more broadly. Open MRI data
have contributed to large neuroscience initiatives such as the creation of a lifespan brain chart
that was derived from 101,457 individuals8 and the creation of five dominant patterns of brain
atrophy derived from 49,482 individuals65. Behavioral data were used to validate a prognostic
risk score for development and spread of chronic pain66. In a multicohort initiative, it was also
found that APOE ε2 protected against cognitive decline in men, but not in women67. These are
just some examples of the impact of this rich multimodal longitudinal dataset.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Recruitment re-opened in 2022, and we now aim at testing more preventive interventions. Dr.
Maiya Geddes is currently leading a preventive intergenerational randomized controlled trial to
enhance physical activity and slow cognitive decline68. We also received funding to conduct a
clinical trial testing the possible protective impact of a dual orexin receptor antagonist
medication on Aβ and tau plasma levels. We are aware that these interventions could
compromise longitudinal follow-ups by modifying disease course, but believe that if we succeed
at modifying disease trajectories, the gain will largely overcome the loss of the observational
follow-ups.

* * *

medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

hippocampus among PREVENT-AD participants69. The Mnemonic Similarity Task and multishell diffusion sequences have also led to key insights into brain microstructural alterations
70-72
associated with AD biomarkers, APOE4, and cognition. Additional PET, MEG and
behavioral data have also been collected as part of other collaborator projects. We are currently
curating these data for future releases. Moving forward, we are also asking users who derive
analytic measures to send them to us with methods documentation so they can be integrated in
the Data Sharing Repository. This simple way of giving back will improve our repository and
expand the analytic possibilities while also promoting users’ work. A concrete example of this
reciprocal sharing strategy is the five dominant patterns of brain atrophy65 quantified by an
independent group of investigators that have been shared back and are now available to users.

A subset of participants have consented to brain donation, and postmortem brain specimens will
be transferred to the Douglas-Bell Canada Brain Bank following a standardized procedure73After
reception, hemispheres are separated and one unsliced hemisphere (right or left, in alternation) is
fixed and scanned to provide an end-stage MRI-based estimate of disease severity.
Neuropathology assessment is then performed to provide confirmation of AD diagnosis and
assess the presence of co-pathology. The protocols are in place, but no brains have been received
yet. These ex-vivo data will allow us to validate our in-vivo biomarkers and assess research
questions that would not be possible using current in-vivo markers such as assessing the
74
comorbid impact of TDP-43.

The main limitation of the PREVENT-AD cohort is its low levels of racial, ethnic and
socioeconomic diversity. We know that AD risk varies between represented and underrepresented populations and that this variation might be due to biological, lifestyle and
socioeconomic factors (see75). To develop effective preventive AD treatments, we need large,
diverse cohorts to understand these differences. PREVENT-AD, when taken alone, is
unfortunately not a diverse cohort, but we hope that by sharing data that will be pooled with
other datasets, we will help understand genetics and lifestyle diversity. Experts in health equity
research are also welcome to use the StoP-AD Centre’s infrastructure or more adapted
infrastructure to help us increase diversity.

CONCLUSION

The PREVENT-AD is a longitudinal cohort of individuals with a first-degree family history of
sporadic AD from the greater Montreal area in Canada, who are deeply phenotyped and have
more than 10 years of follow-up data. Multimodal biomarker assessment (MRI, PET, CSF,
plasma) and lifestyle data is available for all participants. The data of participants who agreed to
sharing have also been made available to researchers worldwide. While sharing data with
researchers worldwide takes time and funding, we believe it is absolutely needed to move the
field forward and find ways to stop AD.

The data on participants who agreed to sharing can be accessed via the PREVENT-AD Data
Sharing Repository [https://registeredpreventad.loris.ca/](https://registeredpreventad.loris.ca/). Given that sensitive information is
shared, access is restricted to qualified researchers or physicians. The PREVENT-AD
coordinator will verify information of all principal investigators requesting an account before
granting access, after which data can be shared with trainees that are under their supervision and

USAGE NOTES for whom they take the full responsibility of data usage. All terms of use must be agreed to when
requesting an account, at [https://registeredpreventad.loris.ca/login/request-account/](https://registeredpreventad.loris.ca/login/request-account/). In brief,
users must not attempt to sell or claim intellectual property rights in the PREVENT-AD dataset,
users must obtain any needed ethics approvals for their use of the PREVENT-AD dataset, the
data must be used for ‘neuroscience research’, the data must not be redistributed, and any
attempt to re-identify participants is forbidden. When used in publications, the methods section
must state PREVENT-AD as the source of the data and the manuscript describing the first open
release4 or the current release must be cited depending on the data used.

The PET, MEG, and actigraphy data along with the behavioral factors assessed with
questionnaires were not administered at a specific annual visit as the other tests provided. We
thus provided the closest annual visit label and/or the date of acquisition (month and year) to
help with data usage.

REFERENCES

1. Breitner JCS, Poirier J, Etienne PE, Leoutsako JM, Group. ftP-AR. Rational and structure
   for a new center for studies on prevention of Alzheimer's disease (STOP-AD). The Journal of
   Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease. 2016;3(4):236-242.

* * *

2. Cupples LA, Farrer LA, Sadovnick AD, Relkin N, Whitehouse P, Green RC. Estimating
   risk curves for first-degree relatives of patients with Alzheimer's disease: the REVEAL study.
   Genet Med. Jul-Aug 2004;6(4):192-6. doi:10.109701.GIM.0000132679.92238.58

3. Tremblay-Mercier J, Madjar C, Das S, et al. Open science datasets from PREVENT-AD,
   a longitudinal cohort of pre-symptomatic Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage Clin.
   2021;31:102733. doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2021.102733

4. Duff K, Humphreys Clark JD, O'Bryant SE, Mold JW, Schiffer RB, Sutker PB. Utility of
   the RBANS in detecting cognitive impairment associated with Alzheimer's disease: sensitivity,
   specificity, and positive and negative predictive powers. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. Sep
   2008;23(5):603-12. doi:10.1016/j.acn.2008.06.004

5. Meyer PF, Tremblay-Mercier J, Leoutsakos J, et al. INTREPAD: A randomized trial of
   naproxen to slow progress of presymptomatic Alzheimer disease. Neurology. Apr 30
   2019;92(18):e2070-e2080. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000007232

6. Jack CR, Jr., Arani A, Borowski BJ, et al. Overview of ADNI MRI. Alzheimers Dement.
   Oct 2024;20(10):7350-7360. doi:10.1002/alz.14166

7. Parent O, Bussy A, Devenyi GA, et al. Assessment of white matter hyperintensity
   severity using multimodal magnetic resonance imaging. Brain Commun. 2023;5(6):fcad279.
   doi:10.1093/braincomms/fcad279

8. Bethlehem RAI, Seidlitz J, White SR, et al. Brain charts for the human lifespan. Nature.
   Apr 2022;604(7906):525-533. doi:10.1038/s41586-022-04554-y


* * *

10. Tullo S, Patel R, Devenyi GA, et al. MR-based age-related effects on the striatum, globus
    pallidus, and thalamus in healthy individuals across the adult lifespan. Hum Brain Mapp. Dec 15
    2019;40(18):5269-5288. doi:10.1002/hbm.24771

11. Vogel JW, Vachon-Presseau E, Pichet Binette A, et al. Brain properties predict proximity
    to symptom onset in sporadic Alzheimer's disease. Brain. Jun 1 2018;141(6):1871-1883.
    doi:10.1093/brain/awy093

12. Tardif CL, Devenyi GA, Amaral RSC, et al. Regionally specific changes in the
    hippocampal circuitry accompany progression of cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in preclinical
    Alzheimer's disease. Hum Brain Mapp. Feb 2018;39(2):971-984. doi:10.1002/hbm.23897

13. Orban P, Madjar C, Savard M, et al. Test-retest resting-state fMRI in healthy elderly
    persons with a family history of Alzheimer's disease. Sci Data. 2015;2:150043.
    doi:10.1038/sdata.2015.43

14. Verfaillie SCJ, Pichet Binette A, Vachon-Presseau E, et al. Subjective Cognitive Decline
    Is Associated With Altered Default Mode Network Connectivity in Individuals With a Family
    History of Alzheimer's Disease. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. May
    2018;3(5):463-472. doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2017.11.012

15. Fischer L, Molloy EN, Pichet Binette A, et al. Precuneus activity during retrieval is
    positively associated with amyloid burden in cognitively normal older APOE4 carriers. J
    Neurosci. Jan 9 2025;doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1408-24.2024


* * *

17. Rabipour S, Rajagopal S, Pasvanis S, Group P-AR, Rajah MN. Generalization of
    memory-related brain function in asymptomatic older women with a family history of late onset
    Alzheimer's Disease: Results from the PREVENT-AD Cohort. Neurobiol Aging. Aug
    2021;104:42-56. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.03.009

18. Samson AD, Rajagopal S, Pasvanis S, et al. Sex differences in longitudinal changes of
    episodic memory-related brain activity and cognition in cognitively unimpaired older adults with
    a family history of Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage Clin. 2023;40:103532.
    doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2023.103532

19. Marques JP, Kober T, Krueger G, van der Zwaag W, Van de Moortele PF, Gruetter R.
    MP2RAGE, a self bias-field corrected sequence for improved segmentation and T1-mapping at
    high field. Neuroimage. Jan 15 2010;49(2):1271-81. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.002

20. Strikwerda-Brown C, Hobbs DA, Gonneaud J, et al. Association of Elevated Amyloid
    and Tau Positron Emission Tomography Signal With Near-Term Development of Alzheimer
    Disease Symptoms in Older Adults Without Cognitive Impairment. JAMA neurology. Oct 1
    2022;79(10):975-985. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.2379

21. Strikwerda-Brown C, Ozlen H, Pichet Binette A, et al. Trait Mindfulness Is Associated
    With Less Amyloid, Tau, and Cognitive Decline in Individuals at Risk for Alzheimer's Disease.
    Biol Psychiatry Glob Open Sci. Jan 2023;3(1):130-138. doi:10.1016/j.bpsgos.2022.01.001

22. Pichet Binette A, Vachon-Presseau E, Morris J, et al. Amyloid and Tau Pathology
    Associations With Personality Traits, Neuropsychiatric Symptoms, and Cognitive Lifestyle in
    the Preclinical Phases of Sporadic and Autosomal Dominant Alzheimer's Disease. Biol
    Psychiatry. Feb 6 2020;doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2020.01.023


* * *

23. Marchant NL, Lovland LR, Jones R, et al. Repetitive negative thinking is associated with
    amyloid, tau, and cognitive decline. Alzheimers Dement. Jul 2020;16(7):1054-1064.
    doi:10.1002/alz.12116

24. Baril AA, Picard C, Labonte A, et al. Day-to-day sleep variability with Alzheimer's
    biomarkers in at-risk elderly. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). Jan-Mar 2024;16(1):e12521.
    doi:10.1002/dad2.12521

25. Baril AA, Picard C, Labonte A, et al. Longer sleep duration and neuroinflammation in atrisk elderly with a parental history of Alzheimer's disease. Sleep. Jun 13
    2024;47(6)doi:10.1093/sleep/zsae081

26. Ai M, Morris TP, Noriega de la Colina A, et al. Midlife physical activity engagement is
    associated with later-life brain health. Neurobiol Aging. Feb 2024;134:146-159.
    doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2023.11.004

27. Ai M, Morris TP, Zhang J, et al. Resting-state MRI functional connectivity as a neural
    correlate of multidomain lifestyle adherence in older adults at risk for Alzheimer's disease. Sci
    Rep. May 9 2023;13(1):7487. doi:10.1038/s41598-023-32714-1

28. Gorgolewski KJ, Auer T, Calhoun VD, et al. The brain imaging data structure, a format
    for organizing and describing outputs of neuroimaging experiments. Sci Data. Jun 21
    2016;3:160044. doi:10.1038/sdata.2016.44


* * *

G. Synergistic association of Aβ and tau pathology with cortical neurophysiology and cognitive
decline in asymptomatic older adults. Nature Neuroscience. 2024;

32. Niso G, Rogers C, Moreau JT, et al. OMEGA: The Open MEG Archive. Neuroimage.
    Jan 1 2016;124(Pt B):1182-1187. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.04.028

33. Desikan RS, Segonne F, Fischl B, et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing
    the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage. Jul 1
    2006;31(3):968-980. doi:Doi 10.1016/J.Neuroimage.2006.01.021

34. Schaefer A, Kong R, Gordon EM, et al. Local-Global Parcellation of the Human Cerebral
    Cortex from Intrinsic Functional Connectivity MRI. Cereb Cortex. Sep 1 2018;28(9):3095-3114.
    doi:10.1093/cercor/bhx179

35. Esteban O, Markiewicz CJ, Blair RW, et al. fMRIPrep: a robust preprocessing pipeline
    for functional MRI. Nat Methods. Jan 2019;16(1):111-116. doi:10.1038/s41592-018-0235-4

36. Theaud G, Houde JC, Bore A, Rheault F, Morency F, Descoteaux M. TractoFlow: A
    robust, efficient and reproducible diffusion MRI pipeline leveraging Nextflow & Singularity.
    Neuroimage. Sep 2020;218:116889. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116889

37. Dadar M, Maranzano J, Misquitta K, et al. Performance comparison of 10 different
    classification techniques in segmenting white matter hyperintensities in aging. Neuroimage. Aug
    15 2017;157:233-249. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.06.009


* * *

40. Klunk WE, Koeppe RA, Price JC, et al. The Centiloid Project: standardizing quantitative
    amyloid plaque estimation by PET. Alzheimers Dement. Jan 2015;11(1):1-15 e1-4.
    doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2014.07.003

41. Karikari TK, Pascoal TA, Ashton NJ, et al. Blood phosphorylated tau 181 as a biomarker
    for Alzheimer's disease: a diagnostic performance and prediction modelling study using data
    from four prospective cohorts. Lancet Neurol. May 2020;19(5):422-433. doi:10.1016/S1474-
    4422(20)30071-5

42. Ashton NJ, Pascoal TA, Karikari TK, et al. Plasma p-tau231: a new biomarker for
    incipient Alzheimer's disease pathology. Acta Neuropathol. May 2021;141(5):709-724.
    doi:10.1007/s00401-021-02275-6

43. Gonzalez-Ortiz F, Ferreira PCL, Gonzalez-Escalante A, et al. A novel ultrasensitive
    assay for plasma p-tau217: Performance in individuals with subjective cognitive decline and
    early Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement. Feb 2024;20(2):1239-1249.
    doi:10.1002/alz.13525

44. Gobom J, Parnetti L, Rosa-Neto P, et al. Validation of the LUMIPULSE automated
    immunoassay for the measurement of core AD biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid. Clin Chem Lab
    Med. Jan 27 2022;60(2):207-219. doi:10.1515/cclm-2021-0651

45. SvDSaFST N. Definition of processes used to remove assay and sample bias from
    SomaScan v4 data and file specification for SomaScan results. 2022. [https://somalogic.com/wpcontent/uploads/2022/07/SL00000048\_Rev-3\_2022-01\_-Data-Standardization-and-File-](https://somalogic.com/wpcontent/uploads/2022/07/SL00000048_Rev-3_2022-01_-Data-Standardization-and-File-)
    Specification-Technical-Note-v2.pdf

46. Candia J, Cheung F, Kotliarov Y, et al. Assessment of Variability in the SOMAscan
    Assay. Sci Rep. Oct 27 2017;7(1):14248. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-14755-5


* * *

47. Bellenguez C, Kucukali F, Jansen IE, et al. New insights into the genetic etiology of
    Alzheimer's disease and related dementias. Nat Genet. Apr 2022;54(4):412-436.
    doi:10.1038/s41588-022-01024-z
48. Dauar MT, Labonte A, Picard C, et al. Characterization of the contactin 5 protein and its
    risk-associated polymorphic variant throughout the Alzheimer's disease spectrum. Alzheimers
    Dement. Jul 2023;19(7):2816-2830. doi:10.1002/alz.12868
49. Ossenkoppele R, Pichet Binette A, Groot C, et al. Amyloid and tau PET-positive
    cognitively unimpaired individuals are at high risk for future cognitive decline. Nat Med. Nov
    2022;28(11):2381-2387. doi:10.1038/s41591-022-02049-x
50. Yakoub Y, Gonzalez-Ortiz F, Ashton NJ, et al. Plasma p-tau217 predicts cognitive
    impairments up to ten years before onset in normal older adults. Alzheimers Dement.
    2024;doi:10.1002/alz.14537
51. Jack CR, Jr., Andrews JS, Beach TG, et al. Revised criteria for diagnosis and staging of
    Alzheimer's disease: Alzheimer's Association Workgroup. Alzheimers Dement. Aug
    2024;20(8):5143-5169. doi:10.1002/alz.13859
52. Gonneaud J, Bedetti C, Pichet Binette A, et al. Association of education with Abeta
    burden in preclinical familial and sporadic Alzheimer disease. Neurology. Sep 15
    2020;95(11):e1554-e1564. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000010314
53. Kobe T, Gonneaud J, Pichet Binette A, et al. Association of Vascular Risk Factors With
    beta-Amyloid Peptide and Tau Burdens in Cognitively Unimpaired Individuals and Its
    Interaction With Vascular Medication Use. JAMA Netw Open. Feb 5 2020;3(2):e1920780.
    doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.20780
54. Kobe T, Binette AP, Vogel JW, et al. Vascular risk factors are associated with a decline
    in resting-state functional connectivity in cognitively unimpaired individuals at risk for
    40

* * *

Alzheimer's disease: Vascular risk factors and functional connectivity changes. Neuroimage.
May 1 2021;231:117832. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.117832
55\. Walker CS, Li L, Baracchini G, et al. Neurobehavioral Mechanisms Influencing the
Association Between Generativity, the Desire to Promote Well-Being of Younger Generations,
and Purpose in Life in Older Adults at Risk for Alzheimer's Disease. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci
Soc Sci. Jun 1 2024;79(6)doi:10.1093/geronb/gbae060
56\. Intzandt B, Sanami S, Huck J, et al. Sex-specific relationships between obesity, physical
activity, and gray and white matter volume in cognitively unimpaired older adults. Geroscience.
Jun 2023;45(3):1869-1888. doi:10.1007/s11357-023-00734-4
57\. Qiu T, Liu ZQ, Rheault F, et al. Structural white matter properties and cognitive
resilience to tau pathology. Alzheimers Dement. May 2024;20(5):3364-3377.
doi:10.1002/alz.13776
58\. da Silva Castanheira J, Wiesman AI, Hansen JY, et al. The neurophysiological brainfingerprint of Parkinson's disease. EBioMedicine. Jul 2024;105:105201.
doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105201
59\. Wiesman AI, Donhauser PW, Degroot C, et al. Aberrant neurophysiological signaling
associated with speech impairments in Parkinson's disease. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. Apr 14
2023;9(1):61. doi:10.1038/s41531-023-00495-z
60\. Wiesman AI, da Silva Castanheira J, Fon EA, Baillet S, Group P-AR, Quebec Parkinson
N. Alterations of Cortical Structure and Neurophysiology in Parkinson's Disease Are Aligned
with Neurochemical Systems. Ann Neurol. Apr 2024;95(4):802-816. doi:10.1002/ana.26871
61\. Wiesman AI, Madge V, Fon EA, et al. Associations between neuromelanin depletion and
cortical rhythmic activity in Parkinson's disease. Brain. Sep 16 2024;doi:10.1093/brain/awae295

* * *

62. Wiesman AI, Gallego-Rudolf J, Villeneuve S, Baillet S, Wilson TW, Group P-AR.
    Neurochemical organization of cortical proteinopathy and neurophysiology along the
    Alzheimer's disease continuum. Alzheimers Dement. Sep 2024;20(9):6316-6331.
    doi:10.1002/alz.14110

63. Poirier A, Picard C, Labonte A, et al. PTPRS is a novel marker for early Tau pathology
    and synaptic integrity in Alzheimer's disease. Sci Rep. Jun 26 2024;14(1):14718.
    doi:10.1038/s41598-024-65104-2

64. Aumont-Rodrigue G, Picard C, Labonte A, Poirier J. Apolipoprotein B gene expression
    and regulation in relation to Alzheimer's disease pathophysiology. Journal of lipid research. Nov
    2024;65(11):100667. doi:10.1016/j.jlr.2024.100667

65. Tanguay-Sabourin C, Fillingim M, Guglietti GV, et al. A prognostic risk score for
    development and spread of chronic pain. Nat Med. Jul 2023;29(7):1821-1831.
    doi:10.1038/s41591-023-02430-4

66. Wood ME, Xiong LY, Wong YY, et al. Sex differences in associations between APOE
    epsilon2 and longitudinal cognitive decline. Alzheimers Dement. Oct 2023;19(10):4651-4661.
    doi:10.1002/alz.13036

67. Walker CS, Noriega de la Colina AE, Li L, et al. Protocol for an intergenerational
    randomized controlled trial to enhance physical activity in older adults at risk for Alzheimer's
    disease. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. Mar 2025;12(3):100039. doi:10.1016/j.tjpad.2024.100039

68. Zhou J, Wearn A, Huck J, et al. Iron Deposition and Distribution Across the
    Hippocampus Is Associated with Pattern Separation and Pattern Completion in Older Adults at


* * *

Risk for Alzheimer's Disease. J Neurosci. May 8 2024;44(19)doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1973-
23.2024

70. Wearn A, Tremblay SA, Tardif CL, et al. Neuromodulatory subcortical nucleus integrity
    is associated with white matter microstructure, tauopathy and APOE status. Nat Commun. Jun 3
    2024;15(1):4706. doi:10.1038/s41467-024-48490-z

71. Turner GR, Hewan P, Wearn A, et al. Locus coeruleus integrity is related to an
    exploitation-based decision-making bias in older adulthood. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. May 28
    2024;121(22):e2322617121. doi:10.1073/pnas.2322617121

72. Tremblay SA, Nathan Spreng R, Wearn A, et al. Sex and APOE4-specific links between
    cardiometabolic risk factors and white matter alterations in individuals with a family history of
    Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Aging. Jun 2025;150:80-96.

73. Dadar M, Sanches L, Fouquet JP, et al. The Douglas-Bell Canada Brain Bank Postmortem Brain Imaging Protocol. Aperture Neuro. 2024;4doi:10.52294/001c.123347

74. Wisse LEM, Wuestefeld A, Murray ME, Jagust W, La Joie R. Role of tau versus TDP-43
    pathology on medial temporal lobe atrophy in aging and Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers
    Dement. Feb 2025;21(2):e14582. doi:10.1002/alz.14582


CONSENT STATEMENT

75. Weiner MW, Veitch DP, Miller MJ, et al. Increasing participant diversity in AD research:
    Plans for digital screening, blood testing, and a community-engaged approach in the Alzheimer's
    Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 4. Alzheimers Dement. Jan 2023;19(1):307-317.
    doi:10.1002/alz.12797 medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors wish to acknowledge the staff of the PREVENT-AD as well as of the Cerebral
Imaging Centre of the Douglas Mental Health University Institute and of the PET unit of the
McConnell Brain Imaging Centre of the Montreal Neurological Institute. A full listing of the
PREVENT-AD Research Group members can be found
at [https://preventad.loris.ca/acknowledgements/acknowledgements.php?date=\[2023-01-01\]](https://preventad.loris.ca/acknowledgements/acknowledgements.php?date=%5B2023-01-01%5D). We
also thank the participants of the PREVENT-AD cohort for dedicating their time and energy to
helping us collect these data and agreeing to share their data openly. We would like to
acknowledge Bill Jagust, Suzanne Baker, and Susan Landau who shared with us coded to helped
us build our PET processing pipeline and Ilana R. Leppert who did the pulse sequence
programming required for the MPM protocol.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

KB has served as a consultant and at advisory boards for Abbvie, AC Immune, ALZPath,
AriBio, Beckman-Coulter, BioArctic, Biogen, Eisai, Lilly, Moleac Pte. Ltd, Neurimmune,
Novartis, Ono Pharma, Prothena, Quanterix, Roche Diagnostics, Sanofi and Siemens
Healthineers; has served at data monitoring committees for Julius Clinical and Novartis; has
given lectures, produced educational materials and participated in educational programs for AC
Immune, Biogen, Celdara Medical, Eisai and Roche Diagnostics; and is a co-founder of Brain
Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator
Program, outside the work presented in this paper. The other authors report no competing
interests medRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.22.25331791); this version posted July 23, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

FUNDING SOURCES

This second release was made possible via the Canadian Alzheimer Platform (CAP) funded by
Brain Canada (S. Villeneuve). The second phase of data collection was supported by a Fonds de
Recherche du Québec – Santé (FRQ-356162) to J. Poirier and S. Villeneuve, a Brain Canada
grant to S. Villeneuve, a J. L. Levesque Foundation to J. Poirier and S. Villeneuve and a Canada
Foundation for Innovation to S. Villeneuve. Among the project grants used to collect data in the
Phase 2 of data acquisition, the Alzheimer Society of Canada (NIG-17-08), the Alzheimer
Association and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR; PJT-438655, PJT-367122,
PJT-410106, PJT-463677) grants to S. Villeneuve supported cognitive, behavioral, plasma, PET
and MEG data; the National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Institute on Aging (NIA;
R01AG068563; 3R01AG068563-04S1), Alzheimer’s Association & Brain Canada (AARG-22-
927100) and Canada First Research Excellence Fund, Healthy Brains for Healthy Lives,
Innovative Ideas Program grants to R.N. Spreng supported fluid, behavioral, cognitive, novel
cognitive, and all MRI data; and the CIHR grants to J. Poirier (#PJT 153287, 178210), J.S.C.
Breitner (#PJT 451830) and L. Collins (#PJT 165921) as well as a Lemaire foundation donation
to J Poirier supported behavioral, cognitive, genetic, proteomic and fluid data collection.

The first phase of data collection was supported by a $13.5 million, 7-year public-private
partnership using funds provided by McGill University, the FRQ-S, an unrestricted research
grant from Pfizer Canada, the J.L. Levesque Foundation, the Lemaire Foundation, the Douglas
Hospital Research Centre and Foundation, the Government of Canada, and the Canada Fund for
Innovation to J.S.C. Breitner and J. Poirier. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the
Development Office of the McGill University Faculty of Medicine and by the Douglas Hospital
Research Centre Foundation ( [http://www.douglas.qc.ca/](http://www.douglas.qc.ca/)). The first release was supported by the

* * *

Canadian Open Neuroscience Platform funded, in part, by Brain Canada. MRG is supported by a
FRSQ Salary Award, the Canada Brain Research Fund, an innovative arrangement between the
Government of Canada (through Health Canada) and Brain Canada Foundation, an Alzheimer
Society Research Program New Investigator Grant, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research,
the Canada First Research Excellence Fund, awarded through the Healthy Brains, Healthy Lives
initiative at McGill University, and the National Institutes of Health (P30 AG048785). S.B. is
supported by the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH, R01-EB026299-05), the Tier-
1 CIHR Canada Research Chair of Neural Dynamics of Brain Systems (CRC-2017-00311), and a
Discovery Grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(436355-13). KB is supported by the Swedish Research Council (#2017-00915 and #2022-
00732), the Swedish Alzheimer Foundation (#AF-930351, #AF-939721, #AF-968270, and #AF-
994551), Hjärnfonden, Sweden (#ALZ2022-0006, #FO2024-0048-TK-130 and FO2024-0048-
HK-24), the Swedish state under the agreement between the Swedish government and the
County Councils, the ALF-agreement (#ALFGBG-965240 and #ALFGBG-1006418), the
European Union Joint Program for Neurodegenerative Disorders (JPND2019-466-236), the
Alzheimer’s Association 2021 Zenith Award (ZEN-21-848495), the Alzheimer’s Association
2022-2025 Grant (SG-23-1038904 QC), La Fondation Recherche Alzheimer (FRA), Paris,
France, the Kirsten and Freddy Johansen Foundation, Copenhagen, Denmark, Familjen
Rönströms Stiftelse, Stockholm, Sweden, and an anonymous philanthropist and donor. R.N.S. is
additionally supported by Fonds de recherche du Québec – Santé.

KEYWORDS

Biomarkers, preclinical, neuroimaging, data repository, cognition, clinical progression