Perceived stress mediates the association
between orbitofrontal cortex grey matter
volume and depressive symptoms in older
women

Received: 12 June 2025

Accepted: 29 November 2025

Published online: 07 December 2025

Cite this article as: Ma X., Wang S. &
Wu D. Perceived stress mediates the
association between orbitofrontal
cortex grey matter volume and
depressive symptoms in older women.
Sci Rep (2025). [https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/)
s41598-025-31127-6

Xiucheng Ma, Song Wang & Dongmei Wu

We are providing an unedited version of this manuscript to give early access to its
findings. Before final publication, the manuscript will undergo further editing. Please
note there may be errors present which affect the content, and all legal disclaimers
apply.

If this paper is publishing under a Transparent Peer Review model then Peer
Review reports will publish with the final article.

© The Author(s) 2025. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do
not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

* * *

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Perceived stress mediates the association between orbitofrontal cortex
grey matter volume and depressive symptoms in older women

2 3 4 5 \*
Xiucheng MA1, Song Wang, Dongmei WU

Abstract

As a common mental health problem among elderly women, depressive symptoms
can lead to serious consequences. Consistent evidence has demonstrated that perceived

a stable risk factor for depressive symptoms in the elderly. However, little is known

a stable risk factor for depressive symptoms in the elderly. However, little is known
about the neurobiological correlates of perceived stress and the brain-stress

mechanisms to predict depressive symptoms in the older population. In the research
reported here, we used a voxel-based morphometry method based on structural
magnetic resonance imaging to calculate grey matter volume (GMV) in the brain to
study these issues in 120 older women. Whole-brain correlation analyses and predictive
ARTICLE IN PRESS

mechanisms to predict depressive symptoms in the older population. In the research
reported here, we used a voxel-based morphometry method based on structural
magnetic resonance imaging to calculate grey matter volume (GMV) in the brain to
study these issues in 120 older women. Whole-brain correlation analyses and predictive
ARTICLE IN PRESS

1
Department of Nursing, The Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute,
MOE Key Laboratory for Neuroinformation, University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, Chengdu610036, China.
2
Huaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), Department of Radiology, West China

5
Department of Nursing, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, School of Medicine,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. 32# W. Sec 2, 1st Ring
Rd., Chengdu, China, 610072.
\*
Corresponding Author， Email： [wudongmei\_2001@163.com](mailto:wudongmei_2001@163.com)，Tel.: +86 28

Hospital of Sichuan University610041, Chengdu, China.
3
Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Chengdu, China.
4
Functional and Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Chengdu,

* * *

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44

further indicated that perceived stress mediated the linkage of right OFC GMV to
depressive symptoms. Importantly, these results remained even after adjusting for
anxiety symptoms, showing a nature of specificity. Overall, our study may identify a
new neuroanatomical marker of perceived stress in older women and suggest a potential
neuropsychological pathway for the prediction of depressive symptoms in the elderly,
in which the right OFC GMV is associated with depressive symptoms through
perceived stress.

Key words: perceived stress, orbitofrontal cortex, structural magnetic resonance
imaging, depressive symptoms, older woman

1.Introduction

As one of the most important indicators of mental health in old age1 depressive
symptoms refer to the negative emotional responses to internal and external
environmental stimuli, accompanied by manifestations of reduced mental energy, low ARTICLE IN PRESS
3
mood, sadness, and distress, which can interfere with an individual’s daily lives2,.
Evidence from the epidemiological studies has shown that the detection rate of
4
depressive symptoms in older adults (aged ≥ 60 years) is as high as 37.52%, with a
5-7
higher detection rate in females than males. It has been reported that persistent and
excessive depressive symptoms would lead to depressive disorders8, a serious and
prevalent disease that can impair one’s daily life and contribute to suicide in severe
cases9, which has become a significant risk factor for all-cause death in the elderly10.
Moreover, depressive symptoms in the elderly may also lead to other neuropsychiatric

* * *

45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66

disorders (such as alzheimer's disease11, anxiety disorder12) and many physical diseases
14
(such as cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases13, and endocrine diseases15).
Given the high prevalence of depressive symptoms in older people (particularly in older
women) and their potentially serious adverse effects, research on the potential risk
factors of depressive symptoms in this population is imperative.

As such a factor, perceived stress refers to the degree to which individuals assess
16
external stressful events as stressful, uncontrollable, and unpredictable . Older
individuals’ perceived stress will largely cause mood changes: the more pressure they
feel, the more likely they are to have a bad mood; and if the pressure is not effectively
released for an extended period, then symptoms of depression may occur17. Numerous
previous studies have shown that perceived stress is a significant predictor for the onset
17-20
and development of depressive symptoms in older populations . For instance, many
cross-sectional studies have confirmed the positive association between perceived
18-21
stress and depressive symptoms in different groups of older people . In addition,
ARTICLE IN PRESS
some longitudinal studies have shown that the elderly’s perceived stress can predict
17 22 23
their subsequent depressive symptoms ,,. Furthermore, several intervention studies
have shown that stress intervention training not only reduces the levels of perceived
24-27
stress but also has a favorable effect on depressive symptoms in older populations.
In sum, perceived stress might be a stable risk factor for depressive symptoms in older
people.

Although the predictive effect of perceived stress on depressive symptoms in the
elderly is well established, we know little about the neuroanatomical correlates of

* * *

## ARTICLE IN PRESS

perceived stress in this population. With the development of neuroimaging techniques 68 (especially magnetic resonance imaging \[MRI\]) over the past two decades, more and 69 more research has been devoted to exploring the relationship between brain structure 70 and perceived stress 28-31 . Evidence from the extant literature has suggested that 71 perceived stress is primarily associated with structural variability in brain regions in the 72 prefrontal-limbic system loop, such as the whole prefrontal cortex 32 , 33 , dorsal lateral 73 prefrontal cortex34, 35 , medial prefrontal cortex36, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) 37 , 38 , 74 hippocampus 39-41 , and amygdala 36 , 42 , 43 . However, most of these previous studies have 75 been limited to adolescents35, 36 , 39 , 40 , 43 , 44 , and middle-aged adults33, 45 , leaving a 76 knowledge gap regarding the neuroanatomical correlates of perceived stress in older 77 people. To date, there is a paucity of research on the relationship between perceived 78 stress and brain structure in older population, and these studies have been almost 79 exclusively devoted to revealing the link of perceived stress with the structure of the 80 hippocampus41, 46 , 47 , with little attention paid to changes in the structure of other brain

# ARTICLE IN PRESS

81 regions in the prefrontal-limbic system loop. Therefore, far more work is necessary to 82 obtain a better understanding of the brain structural correlates of perceived stress in the 83 elderly population. 84 In light of the above, the current study was aimed to examine the structural brain 85 correlates of perceived stress and explore the brain-stress mechanism in predicting 86 depression symptoms in a sample of older adults. To this end, we scanned all 87 participants using structural MRI and assessed their depressive symptoms and perceived stress levels using standard measures. Here, we used the voxel-based

* * *

89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110

48 49
morphometry (VBM) method to measure brain grey matter volume (GMV), because
the GMV assessed with VBM reflects the total volume of the grey matter compartment
between the white matter boundary and the pial surface, which is roughly positively
correlated with the number of neurons, and has become a major index for studying
brain–behavior association50. We first performed whole-brain correlation and predictive
analyses to identify brain regions whose GMV associated with perceived stress. Based
on existing studies of structural neural correlates related to perceived stress, we
hypothesized that GMV in prefrontal-limbic brain regions (e.g., the OFC, dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala) might be
related to perceived stress. Next, we conducted mediation analyses to explore the
relationship between perceived stress, depressive symptoms, and GMV. Based on the
19 20 22
links of the elderly’s depressive symptoms with perceived stress17,,, and
51-54
prefrontal-limbic system loop, we further speculate that some brain regions related
to perceived stress may also be related to depressive symptoms, and perceived stress
ARTICLE IN PRESS
may play an intermediary role in the relationship between GMV and depressive
symptoms. Finally, to check the specificity of the findings, supplementary analyses
were done to exclude the confounding effects of anxiety symptoms.

* * *

111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132

58 5 7 59 60
of stress and depression symptoms ,,,. Thus, focusing on a single sex alone may
rule out the potentially confounding effects of sex on the results; and a better
understanding of the sex-specific neural markers of perceived stress and their relations
to depressive symptoms may help inform precision medicine in early identification,
intervention, and improved health outcome.

^{577,59.60}.

2. Methods

The data for this study were derived from the baseline assessment of a larger project
investigating the neural mechanisms of psychotherapy (ChiCTR2100041831).
Participants were community-dwelling older women recruited from Chengdu, China,
through poster and advertisement campaigns. The inclusion criteria are: (a) Women
aged 60 and over; (b) communication is barrier-free, or communication is barrier-free
ARTICLE IN PRESS
after sight and hearing correction; (c) Chinese sharp-handed questionnaire61 rated righthanded people; (d) informed consent and voluntary participation in this study.
Exclusion criteria include: (a)T1-weighted MRI shows a cerebral infarction (lacunar
cerebral infarction > 15mm) or other cerebrovascular diseases; (b) diseases that may
lead to changes in brain tissue, such as metastasis tumor disease, severe hypertension,
or diabetes; unstable physical conditions, such as severe asthma, epilepsy, brain tumors,
and other neurodegenerative diseases; Physical diseases that may cause mood disorders,
such as multiple sclerosis, thyroid diseases, chronic pain, etc.; (c) persons with a

* * *

133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154

previous diagnosis or current mental disorder; (d) a history of psychotropic substances
or alcohol abuse in the last 2 months; (e) people suffer from claustrophobia or
contraindications to MRI(such as metal implants); (f) participants in other research
projects during the study period; (g) participants who provided invalid questionnaires
or withdrew from the study.

From October 2021 to August 2023, 132 older women agreed to participate in this
study and were screened. Twelve participants were excluded according to the inclusion
and exclusion criteria, so 120 older women (ages ranging from 60-83 years, with a mean
age of 68.46 ± 5.06 years) who met the criteria were finally included in the data analysis.

68.46\\pm5.06

2.2 Ethics statement

The research has been approved by the Ethics Review Committee of the Clinical
Hospital of Chengdu Institute of Brain Science, University of Electronic Science and
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Technology of China, with a review number \[2020\], and an ethical examination number
(37). All subjects were informed about the study and signed written informed consent
before participation. This study meets the requirements of the Helsinki Declaration of
the World Medical Association. Additionally, this study has been registered at the
Chinese Clinical Trial Registry. The trial registration number is ChiCTR2100041831,
and the date of first registration is 07/01/2021.

* * *

155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176

2.3.1 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10)

The PSS-10 is a widely used tool to evaluate the degree of stress people have felt in
63
the past month62,. The scale comprises 10 items rated on a 5-point Likert scale (from
1 = "Never" to 5 = "Always"). Items 4, 5, 7, and 8 are reverse-scored. The total score
ranges from 10 to 50, with higher scores indicating greater perceived stress. The scale
has been used to assess levels of stress perception in various Chinese populations
(including community-dwelling older adults) and has demonstrated satisfactory internal
reliability (Cronbach’s α=0.70-0.91) and retest reliability (r=0.68-0.70), as well as
64-68
external validity with relations to symptoms of depression and anxiety. Cronbach’s
α coefficient of the scale in this study is 0.86, showing an adequate internal reliability.

2.3.2 Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D)
ARTICLE IN PRESS

To assess subjects’ depressive symptoms, we employed the CES-D, which consists
of 20 questions and the subjects are required to rate the frequency of symptoms in the
last week on a scale of 0 to 3, with a total score ranging from 0 to 60 and the higher the
70
score, the more serious the depressive tendency of the subjects69,. The scale has been
widely used in the assessment of depression symptoms in different populations and has
71-73
shown satisfactory psychometric properties. In China, the CES-D has been
repeatedly applied to different groups of older adults, such as elderly diabetics, rural
older adults, elderly hypertensive patients, and elderly veterans in the community and

* * *

177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198

74-77
has shown adequate reliability and validity. The Cronbach’s α coefficient of this
scale is 0.92 in this study, showing a satisfied internal reliability.

2.3.3 Self-Rating Anxiety Scale (SAS)

Since many existing studies have found that anxiety symptom is associated with
79 81 83
depressed symptom78,, perceived stress80,, and brain structure82,, we used the
SAS84 to test whether anxiety symptom would influence the associations between GMV,
perceived stress and depression symptoms. The scale comprises 20 items, each assessed
on a 4-point Likert scale（from 0 = "Not at all" to 3 = "All the time"）, yielding a total
84
score from 0 to 60, where higher scores indicate increased anxiety levels . The scale
has been widely used with various groups of Chinese elderly, including those in nursing
homes, communities, and empty nesters; and it has demonstrated good internal
85-88
reliability and validity in these demographics. The Cronbach’s α coefficient of SAS
in this study was 0.77, showing an adequate internal reliability.
ARTICLE IN PRESS

\\mathrm{a l l}^{}!{}^{n!}

\\mathrm{S A S^{84}}

MRI image acquisition was done with a Siemens 3.0T (MAGNETOM Skyra) MRI
scanner and a 32-channel phased-array head coil in the Department of Radiology of the
Fourth People's Hospital of Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China. T1-weighted structural
images of each subject were obtained using magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo
sequence with acquisition parameters including: repetition time = 2300 ms, echo time
= 2.32 ms, field of view = 240 × 240mm3, matrix = 256 × 256, voxel size = 0.9 × 0.9 ×

2.4 MRI Image acquisition and pre-processing

* * *

199 0.9 mm3, flip angle = 8°, slices = 192. To minimize head movement, we fixed the
200 subjects' heads with foam pads. To attenuate the noise of the machine scanning, we
201 instructed all subjects to wear disposable professional earplugs.
202 S-MRI preprocessing was done using the Automated Computational Anatomy
203 Toolbox (CAT12, [http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/cat12/](http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/cat12/)), based on SPM12 software (http：
204 // [www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/](http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/) spm12 / ). Preprocessing was performed using
205 the following steps: first, to ensure data quality, all images were displayed in SPM12 to
206 screen for artifacts or structural damage. For better image alignment, the anterior
207 commissure-posterior commissure coordinates were manually adjusted so the origin
208 coordinates were in the anterior commissure region. Next, the image is segmented into
209 white matter, grey matter, and cerebrospinal fluid using the "New Segmentation"
210 method in SPM12. In the third step, alignment, normalization, and modulation analyses
211 were performed using the DARTEL (Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registration Through
212 Exponential Lie algebra) method89. That is, all grey matter images were aligned and
ARTICLE IN PRESS
213 resampled to a spatial resolution of 1.5 mm3 and then normalized to Montreal
214 Neurological Institute space (MIN). The segmented grey matter was modulated using
215 the inverse Jacobi matrix of the local transforms to measure brain volume. Then, the
216 image data is smoothly modulated (Gaussian kernel is 8 mm3) to reduce registration
217 inaccuracy and improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Finally, to eliminate edge effects at
218 the boundary between grey and white matter, we masked the generated image with an
90
219 absolute threshold template of 0.2.
220

0.9~\\mathrm{m m}^{3}

1.5,\\mathrm{\ m m}^{3}

8~\\mathrm{m m}^{3},

0.2^{90}

* * *

221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
242

2.5 Statistical analyses

2.5.1 Whole-brain correlation analysis

To identify the brain regions in which GMV is associated with perceived stress, we
performed a whole-brain correlation analysis between perceived stress scores and voxel
wise GMV values, with age, education level, income, and total GMV as control
variables. Random field theory (RFT) was then used for multiple comparison
91
corrections (voxel level: p<0.001, cluster level: p<0.05). This method has been shown
92 93
to be useful in voxel-based GMV studies to determine significant results90,,.

p{<}0.05)^{91}

2.5.2 Confirmatory cross-validation analysis

We then examined the robustness of the relationship between perceived stress and
brain structure using a linear regression approach based on balanced cross-validation
94 95
machine learning90,,. In the regression model, GMV, which is particularly related to
perceived stress, was used as the independent variable (X) and PSS-10 scores as the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
dependent variable (Y). The data were first randomly divided equally into four portions
to ensure that the distributions of both the X and Y were balanced in each portion. Next,
any three of these were extracted to construct a linear regression model, which was used
to make predictions on the remaining data. This training and testing process was
performed four times to obtain the average of the correlation coefficients of the
observed and predicted values (r (predicted, observation)), which represents how well the X
can predict the Y. The significance of r (predicted, observation) was tested using a non-
97
parametric test with 5000 iterations96,. The analysis was done by controlling for age,

* * *

243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257
258
259
260
261
262
263
264

education level, income, and total GMV.

2.5.3 Mediation analysis

We conducted mediation analyses using SPSS macro PROCESS98 to explore whether
perceived stress plays a mediating role between GMV and depressive symptoms. In the
analysis, GMV of brain regions associated with perceived stress was used as the X,
perceived stress scores as the mediator variable (M), depression scores as the Y, and
age, education level, income, and total GMV as control variables. The analysis has four
paths, including path a (representing the relationship between X and M), path b (the
relationship between M and Y after controlling for the effect of the X), path c
(representing the relationship between X and Y) and path c' (representing the
relationship between X and Y after controlling for the effect of the M), as well as the
99
indirect effect of being path c minus path c' (or path a × path b). Statistical significance
was determined using the bootstrapping method (5000 iterations), and estimates of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
indirect effects were considered significant when not spanning zero in the 95%
100
confidence interval (CI). To explore the directionality of the links between GMV,
perceived stress, and depressive symptoms, we conducted another mediation analysis
with perceived stress scores as the X, GMV of brain regions associated with perceived
stress as the M, depressive symptoms as the Y and age, education level, income, and
total GMV as the control variables.

3. Results

* * *

265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286

3.1 Behavior results

Table 1 shows the means, standard deviations, ranges, and bivariate correlations of the
behavioral variables measured in this study. As expected, perceived stress had a positive
correlation with depressive symptoms (r = 0.51, p < 0.001). This correlation remained
even after adjusting for age, education level and income (r = 0.53，p < 0.001). In
addition, perceived stress had no significant correlations with age (r = -0.06, p =0.526),
education level (r = -0.01, p = 0.928), or income (r = -0.11, p = 0.218).

(\\mathbf{r}!=!0.51

(\\mathtt{r},=,0.11,p,=,0.218)

----Insert table 1 about here ----

3.2 GMV correlates of perceived stress

Whole brain correlation analysis based on age, education level, income, and total GMV
as control variables showed a positive correlation between GMV in the right OFC and
perceived stress (r = 0.36, p < 0.001; Table 2, Figure 1). No brain area with a negative
ARTICLE IN PRESS
correlation between GMV and perceived stress was found in this analysis. To test the
stability of the relationship between GMV and perceived stress identified in the wholebrain correlation analyses, we performed a confirmatory cross-validation analysis. The
results showed that after adjusting for age, education, income, and total GMV, the GMV
of the right OFC was reliably linked with the perceived stress scores. (r = 0.31, p <
0.001).

p<

(\\mathtt{r}=0.36,p<0.001

----Insert table 2 about here ----

* * *

287
288
289
290
291
292
293
294
295
296
297
298
299
300
301
302
303
304
305
306
307
308

----Insert Figure 1 about here ----

3.3 GMV linking perceived stress to depressive symptoms

To test the hypothesis that GMV influences depressive symptoms in older women
through perceived stress, we performed correlation and mediation analyses. First,
correlation analysis with age, education level, income, and total GMV as control
variables showed a positive correlation (r = 0.21, p = 0.022) between depressive
symptoms and right OFC GMV that was linked with perceived stress. Then, mediation
analysis with age, education level, income, and total GMV as control variables found
that perceived stress had a significant indirect effect on the relationship between GMV
in the right OFC and depressive symptoms (indirect effect = 0.18, 95% CI = \[ 0.09,\
0.30\], p < 0.05, Figure 2). In summary, perceived stress may mediate the relationship
between GMV in the right OFC and depressive symptoms in older women.

To explore the directionality of the relationship among GMV, perceived stress, and
ARTICLE IN PRESS
depressive symptoms, we conducted another mediation analysis with perceived stress
as the X, GMV in right OFC as the M, and depressive symptoms as the Y. The results
showed that the indirect effect of this mediation model was not significant (indirect
effect = 0.01, 95% CI= \[-0.05, 0.08\], p >0.05). Thus, there may be only one valid
neuropsychological pathway for predicting depressive symptoms in older women, in
which GMV in the right OFC is linked to depressive symptoms via perceived stress.

----Insert Figure 2 about here ----

* * *

309
310
311
312
313
314
315
316
317
318
319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
328
329
330

3.4 Supplementary analyses

To examine the specificity of our main findings, we interrogated our results
when controlling for anxiety scores as an additional confounding factor. In correlation
analyses, perceived stress was still positively associated with depressive symptoms (r
= 0.31, p < 0.001) and GMV of the right OFC (r = 0.33, p < 0.001) after adding SAS
scores as another control variable. Subsequently, in the cross-validation analysis, the
right OFC can still reliably predict the individual differences of perceived stress (r =
0.28, p = 0.002) after additionally adjusting SAS score. Importantly, after SAS score
was included as a covariant, the mediating effect of perceived stress was still
significant for the link of right OFC with depression symptoms (indirect effect = 0.10,
95% CI = \[0.04, 0.19\], p < 0.05). Therefore, although anxiety can affect the effect of
the results, our research results have a specific nature to some degree.

=0.31

This study aimed to examine the brain structural correlates of perceived stress in an
older female population and to explore the potential brain-stress mechanisms that
predict depressive symptoms. Two main results were found: firstly, greater GMV in the
right OFC was associated with higher levels of perceived stress. Secondly, perceived
stress served as an intermediary to explain the relationship between the right OFC GMV
and depression symptoms. Notably, these results remained even after adjusting for
anxiety symptoms, indicating the specificity of the results. Overall, the current research

4. Discussion

* * *

331
332
333
334
335
336
337
338
339
340
341
342
343
344
345
346
347
348
349
350
351
352

provides new evidence for the neuroanatomical correlates of perceived stress in older
women and reveals a potential neuropsychological pathway for predicting depressive
symptoms, namely that the right OFC GMV is associated with depressive symptoms
through perceived stress.

Consistent with our first guess, the GMV in the right OFC was positively
correlated with perceived stress levels. This finding aligns with the results reported by
Wu et al. in an adolescent cohort101, thereby providing further evidence to support the
structural role of the OFC in human stress perception. It is well established that the
prefrontal cortex, particularly the right OFC, plays a key role in stress regulation and
103
emotion management102,. Alterations in its structure may directly influence an
individual's sensitivity to stress, thereby modulating their subjective perception of stress
104-106
levels. Second, studies have shown that neuronal dendritic morphology is a key
factor influencing the GMV107. Increases in GMV may be associated with dendritic
branching, synaptogenesis, and increased vascularisation108. Thus, an increase in GMV
ARTICLE IN PRESS
in the right OFC may be accompanied by dendritic expansion and enhanced synaptic
input. Such structural changes could lead to increased anxiety and vigilance,
subsequently elevating perceived stress109. Third, the OFC plays a crucial role in
emotional processing and goal-directed behavior, regulating an individual's socially
adaptive behaviours that help individuals adapt to a dynamic and changing social
101 110
environment ,. When the OFC is volumetrically altered or damaged, people tend
111
to make catastrophic life choices ; in addition to making poor decisions, they often
engage in inappropriate, impulsive behaviors that result in their inability to adapt to the

* * *

353
354
355
356
357
358
359
360
361
362
363
364
365
366
367
368
369
370
371
372
373
374

112 113
laws of social survival,. Given that perceived stress is characterized by the
individuals’ subjective feelings to perceive changes in the surrounding environment,
when the individuals are maladaptive to environmental and social changes, it may
114
generate more stress perception . Thus, there is a positive correlation between the
change in right OFC GMV and the change in perceived stress levels.

The noteworthy fact is that we reveal that perceived stress mediates the
relationship between right OFC GMV and depressive symptoms. At the behavioral
level, the positive correlation between perceived stress and depressive symptoms has
19 20 22
been well-established in different groups of older adults17,,,. Even after adjusting
for age, level of education, income, total GMV, and anxiety symptoms, this correlation
is maintained in the current sample. Thus, our results provide new evidence that
perceived stress is a significant predictor of depressive symptoms in older women. At
the brain structural level, we observed a positive correlation between right OFC GMV
and depressive symptoms. This is similar to the finding of a VBM study in 49
ARTICLE IN PRESS
community boys that GMV of OFC was positively associated with the severity of
depressive symptoms115. The increase in cortical thickness of OFC has also been
reported to be positively correlated with the depressive symptoms in female
adolescents116 and patients with temporal lobe epilepsy117. In addition, structural and
118-122
functional variants of the OFC have been widely reported in depressed patients.
It is well known that the OFC is a typically emotionally connected region closely related
to the processes of subjective experience, cognitive appraisal and control of emotions123,
in which the right OFC is more involved in the cognitive processing of negative

* * *

375
376
377
378
379
380
381
382
383
384
385
386
387
388
389
390
391
392
393
394
395
396

emotions124. Therefore, the increase in the GMV of the right OFC may lead to
heightened proper OFC-amygdala neural communication in older women. This process
is closely associated with greater susceptibility to negative emotions and more severe
126
depressive symptoms125,. The OFC is one of the core nodes of the reward system, a
subcortical network in the brain region that focuses on delivering pleasure anticipation
128
and experience-related services127,. Increased GMV in the right OFC may imply
right > left asymmetry of the OFC, and previous studies have shown that asymmetry of
the OFC, particularly thickening of the right OFC, is highly positively correlated with
anhedonia129. Anhedonia is a core symptom of depressive symptoms130. Therefore, an
increase in the GMV of the right OFC is associated with more severe depressive
symptoms. The current research results show that the increase in GMV in the right OFC
may impair its ability to process stress and regulate behavior. These alterations are
closely linked to higher levels of perceived stress, subsequently increasing negative
emotions and ultimately exacerbating depressive symptoms. Overall, our findings
ARTICLE IN PRESS
suggest that perceived stress is a potential mechanism linking right OFC and depressive
symptoms.

* * *

397
398
399
400
401
402
403
404
405
406
407
408
409
410
411
412
413
414
415
416
417
418

397 can adopt various testing methods (such as adding other evaluations or experimental
398 designs) to reduce the interference of subjects' subjective bias on variable
399 measurement132. Third, the history of mental disorders was primarily ascertained
400 through participant self-report. Consequently, this approach may have precluded the
401 identification of undiagnosed cases and is potentially susceptible to recall or social
402 desirability bias, which could have influenced the study outcomes. Fourth, this study
403 only used VBM to analyze the relationship between brain GMV and perceived stress
404 and found that only one brain region, the right OFC, was associated with perceived
405 stress in older women, while other brain regions (e.g., dorsal lateral prefrontal
35
406 cortex34,) previously reported to be associated with perceived stress were not found.
407 In the future, other methods, such as diffusion tensor imaging133 and surface-based
408 morphological analysis134, can be used to provide a more comprehensive statistical
409 analysis of the subtle changes in brain structure associated with perceived stress. Finally,
410 this study was cross-sectional, and the intermediary analyses are statistical, so it is
ARTICLE IN PRESS
411 impossible to get the causal relationship between GMV, perceived stress, and
412 depression symptoms. Future studies could use longitudinal design to determine the
413 causal relationship between these variables.

414 In summary, the present study reveals a new neural correlate of perceived stress,
415 i.e., GMV in the right OFC is positively associated with perceived stress, in an older
416 female population. Furthermore, our study provides fresh evidence for the mediating
417 role of perceived stress in the relationship between right OFC GMV and depressive
418 symptoms. These findings together indicate that the right OFC GMV and perceived

* * *

419
420
421
422
423
424
425
426
427
428
429
430
431
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
439
440
441
442
443
444
445
446
447
448
449
450

stress play a key role in the depressive symptoms of older women and provide a new
perspective for studying how the brain structure affects depressive symptoms via
individual psychological characteristics. Importantly, our findings may be helpful for
future healthcare workers to formulate behavioral training courses135 or neural
136
intervention measures for target brain regions to reduce the perceived stress level of
older women and reduce their depressive symptoms.

1. Lei, X., Sun, X., Strauss, J., Zhang, P. & Zhao, Y. Depressive Symptoms and Ses Among the Mid-
   ARTICLE IN PRESS
   Aged and Elderly in China: Evidence From the China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study
   National Baseline. Soc. Sci. Med. 120, 224-232 (2014).
2. Cheruvu, V. K. & Chiyaka, E. T. Prevalence of Depressive Symptoms Among Older Adults Who
   Reported Medical Cost as a Barrier to Seeking Health Care: Findings From a Nationally
   Representative Sample. Bmc Geriatr. 19, (2019).
3. Dubovsky, S. L., Ghosh, B. M., Serotte, J. C. & Cranwell, V. Psychotic Depression: Diagnosis,
   Differential Diagnosis, and Treatment. Psychother. Psychosom. 90, 160-177 (2021).
4. Xie, Y. et al. Factors Associated with Depressive Symptoms Among the Elderly in China: Structural
   Equation Model. Int. Psychogeriatr. 33, 157-167 (2021).
5. Hargrove, T. W. et al. Race/Ethnicity, Gender, and Trajectories of Depressive Symptoms Across
   Early- And Mid-Life Among the Add Health Cohort. J. Racial Ethn. Health Disparities. 4, 619-
   629 (2020).
6. Rivera Navarro, J., Benito-León, J. & Pazzi Olazarán, K. A. La Depresión En La Vejez: Un
   Importante Problema De Salud En México. América Latina Hoy. 71, 103-118 (2015).
7. Tang, T., Jiang, J. & Tang, X. Prevalence of Depressive Symptoms Among Older Adults in Mainland
   China: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J. Affect. Disord. 293, 379-390 (2021).

Data availability statement

Due to the privacy and ethical restrictions of the subjects, the data supporting the
results of this study are not publicly provided, but can be obtained from the
communication author on reasonable request.

References:
ARTICLE IN PRESS

* * *

451
452
453
454
455
456
457
458
459
460
461
462
463
464
465
466
467
468
469
470
471
472
473
474
475
476
477
478
479
480
481
482
483
484
485
486
487
488
489
490
491
492
493
494

08. Tengku Mohd, T. A. M., Yunus, R. M., Hairi, F., Hairi, N. N. & Choo, W. Y. Social Support and
    Depression Among Community Dwelling Older Adults in Asia: A Systematic Review. Bmj Open.
    9, e26667 (2019).
09. Hawton, K., Comabella, C. C. I., Haw, C. & Saunders, K. Risk Factors for Suicide in Individuals
    with Depression: A Systematic Review. J. Affect. Disord. 1-3, 17-28 (2013).
10. Diniz, B. S. et al. The Effect of Gender, Age, and Symptom Severity in Late‐Life Depression On
    the Risk of All‐Cause Mortality: The Bambuí Cohort Study of Aging. Depress. Anxiety. 31,
    787-795 (2014).
11. Dal Forno, G. et al. Depressive Symptoms, Sex, and Risk for Alzheimer's Disease. Ann. Neurol. 57,
    381-387 (2005).
12. Jacobson, N. C. & Newman, M. G. Anxiety and Depression as Bidirectional Risk Factors for One
    Another: A Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies. Psychol. Bull. 143, 1155-1200 (2017).
13. Harshfield, E. L. et al. Association Between Depressive Symptoms and Incident Cardiovascular
    Diseases. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. 324, 2396-2405 (2020).
14. Krishnan, K. R. R. Depression as a Contributing Factor in Cerebrovascular Disease. Am. Heart J.
    140, S70-S76 (2000).
15. Hestad, K. A., Aukrust, P., Tønseth, S. & Reitan, S. K. Depression Has a Strong Relationship to
    Alterations in the Immune, Endocrine and Neural System. Current psychiatry reviews. 5, 287-
    297 (2009).
16. S Cohen, T. K. R. M. A Global Measure of Perceived Stress. J. Health Soc. Behav. 4, 385-396 (1983).
17. Tsai, A. C., Chi, S. & Wang, J. The Association of Perceived Stress with Depressive Symptoms in
    Older Taiwanese—Result of a Longitudinal National Cohort Study. Prev. Med. 57, 646-651
    (2013).
18. Brown, L. L., Abrams, L. R., Mitchell, U. A. & Ailshire, J. A. Measuring More than Exposure: Does
    Stress Appraisal Matter for Black-White Differences in Anxiety and Depressive Symptoms
    Among Older Adults? Innov. Aging. 4, a40 (2020).
19. Chen, Y., Peng, Y., Ma, X. & Dong, X. Conscientiousness Moderates the Relationship Between
    Perceived Stress and Depressive Symptoms Among U.S. Chinese Older Adults. J. Gerontol. Ser.
    ARTICLE IN PRESS
    A-Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 72, S108-S112 (2017).
20. Deeken, F. et al. Psychometric Properties of the Perceived Stress Scale in a Sample of German
    Dementia Patients and their Caregivers. Int. Psychogeriatr. 30, 39-47 (2018).
21. Da Silva-Sauer, L. et al. Psychological Resilience Moderates the Effect of Perceived Stress On Late-
    Life Depression in Community-Dwelling Older Adults. Trends in Psychology. 29, 670-683
    (2021).
22. Chao, S. Functional Disability and Depressive Symptoms:Longitudinal Effects of Activity
    Restriction, Perceived Stress, and Social Support. Aging Ment. Health. 18, 767-776 (2014).
23. Dautovich, N. D., Dzierzewski, J. M. & Gum, A. M. Older Adults Display Concurrent but
    Not Delayed Associations Between Life Stressors and Depressive Symptoms:
    A Microlongitudinal Study. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 22, 1131-1139
    (2014).
24. Ernst, S. et al. Effects of Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction On Quality of Life in Nursing Home

    Residents: A Feasibility Study. Forsch Komplementmed. 15, 74-81 (2008).
25. Kumar, S., Adiga, K. R. & George, A. Impact of Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (Mbsr) On
    Depression Among Elderly Residing in Residential Homes. The Nursing Journal of India. 6,

* * *

495
496
497
498
499
500
501
502
503
504
505
506
507
508
509
510
511
512
513
514
515
516
517
518
519
520
521
522
523
524
525
526
527
528
529
530
531
532
533
534
535
536
537
538

248-251 (2014).
26\. Lindayani, L., Hendra, A., Juniarni, L. & Nurdina, G. Effectiveness of Mindfulness Based Stress
Reduction On Depression in Elderly: A Systematic Review. Journal of nursing practice (Online).
4, 8-12 (2020).
27\. Rasing, N. L. et al. The Impact of Music On Stress Biomarkers: Protocol of a Substudy of the Cluster-
Randomized Controlled Trial Music Interventions for Dementia and Depression in Elderly Care
(Middel). Brain Sci. 12, 485 (2022).
28\. Cardoner, N. et al. Impact of Stress On Brain Morphology: Insights Into Structural Biomarkers of

Stress-Related Disorders. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 22, 935-962 (2024).
29\. Katarina, D., D'Aguiar, C. & Pruessner, J. C. What Stress Does to Your Brain: A Review of
Neuroimaging Studies. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry. 54, 6-15 (2009).
30\. Pruessner, J. C. et al. Stress Regulation in the Central Nervous System: Evidence From Structural
and Functional Neuroimaging Studies in Human Populations - 2008 Curt Richter Award Winner.
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 35, 179-191 (2010).
31\. Zhang, L., Gu, J., Chen, Z., Wang, S. & Gong, Q. The Neural Mechanism Underlying Perceived
Stress: Evidence From Psych-Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Chin J Magn Reson Imaging. 11,
66-70 (2020).
32\. Moreno, G. L., Bruss, J. & Denburg, N. L. Increased Perceived Stress is Related to Decreased
Prefrontal Cortex Volumes Among Older Adults. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 39, 313-325
(2017).
33\. Rubin, L. H. et al. Prefrontal Cortical Volume Loss is Associated with Stress-Related Deficits in
Verbal Learning and Memory in Hiv-Infected Women. Neurobiol. Dis. 92, 166-174 (2016).
34\. Blix, E., Perski, A., Berglund, H. & Savic, I. Long-Term Occupational Stress is Associated with
Regional Reductions in Brain Tissue Volumes. Plos One. 8, e64065 (2013).
35\. Michalski, L. J. et al. Perceived Stress is Associated with Increased Rostral Middle Frontal Gyrus
Cortical Thickness: A Family‐Based and Discordant‐Sibling Investigation. Genes, Brain and
Behavior. 16, 781-789 (2017).
36\. Savic, I. Structural Changes of the Brain in Relation to Occupational Stress. Cereb. Cortex. 25, 1554-
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1564 (2015).
37\. Gianaros, P. J. et al. Prospective Reports of Chronic Life Stress Predict Decreased Grey Matter
Volume in the Hippocampus. NeuroImage (Orlando, Fla.). 35, 795-803 (2007).
38\. Shang, Z. et al. Sex-Based Differences in Brain Morphometry Under Chronic Stress: A Pilot Mri
Study. Heliyon. 10, e30354 (2024).
39\. Burkert, N. T., Koschutnig, K., Ebner, F. & Freidl, W. Structural Hippocampal Alterations,
Perceived Stress, and Coping Deficiencies in Patients with Anorexia Nervosa. Int. J. Eating
Disord. 48, 670-676 (2015).
40\. Piccolo, L. R. & Noble, K. G. Perceived Stress is Associated with Smaller Hippocampal Volume in
Adolescence. Psychophysiology. 55, (2018).
41\. Zimmerman, M. E. et al. Perceived Stress is Differentially Related to Hippocampal Subfield
Volumes Among Older Adults. Plos One. 11, e154530 (2016).
42\. Caetano, I. et al. Amygdala Size Varies with Stress Perception. Neurobiol. Stress. 14, 100334 (2021).
43\. Holzel, B. K. et al. Stress Reduction Correlates with Structural Changes in the Amygdala. Soc. Cogn.
Affect. Neurosci. 5, 11-17 (2010).
44\. Li, H. et al. Examining Brain Structures Associated with Perceived Stress in a Large Sample of

248-251 (2014).

* * *

539
540
541
542
543
544
545
546
547
548
549
550
551
552
553
554
555
556
557
558
559
560
561
562
563
564
565
566
567
568
569
570
571
572
573
574
575
576
577
578
579
580
581
582

45. Gianaros, P. J. et al. Prospective Reports of Chronic Life Stress Predict Decreased Grey Matter
    Volume in the Hippocampus. Neuroimage. 35, 795-803 (2007).
46. De Looze, C. et al. Sleep Duration, Sleep Problems, and Perceived Stress are Associated with
    Hippocampal Subfield Volumes in Later Life: Findings From the Irish Longitudinal Study On
    Ageing. Sleep (New York, N.Y.). 45, 1 (2022).
47. Zannas, A. S. et al. Negative Life Stress and Longitudinal Hippocampal Volume Changes in Older
    Adults with and without Depression. J. Psychiatr. Res. 47, 829-834 (2013).
48. Ashburner, J. & Friston, K. J. Voxel-Based Morphometry—the Methods. Neuroimage. 11, 805-821
    (2000).
49. Ashburner, J. & Friston, K. J. Why Voxel-Based Morphometry Should be Used. Neuroimage. 14,
    1238-1243 (2001).
50. Thomas, C. & Baker, C. I. Teaching an Adult Brain New Tricks: A Critical Review of Evidence for
    Training-Dependent Structural Plasticity in Humans. NeuroImage (Orlando, Fla.). 73, 225-236
    (2013).
51. Anna Pink, M. et al. Cortical Thickness and Depressive Symptoms in Cognitively Normal
    Individuals: The Mayo Clinic Study of Aging. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease. 58, 1273-1281
    (2017).
52. Dotson, V. M. P., Davatzikos, C. P., Kraut, M. A. M. P. & Resnick, S. M. P. Depressive Symptoms
    and Brain Volumes in Older Adults: A Longitudinal Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study. J.
    Psychiatry Neurosci. 34, 367-375 (2009).
53. Szymkowicz, S. M. et al. Associations Between Subclinical Depressive Symptoms and Reduced
    Brain Volume in Middle-Aged to Older Adults. Aging Ment. Health. 23, 819-830 (2018).
54. Taki, Y. et al. Male Elderly Subthreshold Depression Patients Have Smaller Volume of Medial Part
    of Prefrontal Cortex and Precentral Gyrus Compared with Age-Matched Normal Subjects: A
    Voxel-Based Morphometry. J. Affect. Disord. 88, 313-320 (2005).
55. Ruigroka, A. N. V. et al. A Meta-Analysis of Sex Differences in Human Brain Structure. Neurosci.
    Biobehav. Rev. 34-50 (2014).
    ARTICLE IN PRESS
56. Ritchie, S. J. et al. Sex Differences in the Adult Human Brain: Evidence From 5216 Uk Biobank
    Participants. Cerebral cortex (New York, NY:1991). 28, 2959-2975 (2018).
57. Wierenga, L. M., Sexton, J. A., Laake, P., Giedd, J. N. & Tamnes, C. K. A Key Characteristic of
    Sex Differences in the Developing Brain: Greater Variability in Brain Structure of Boys than
    Girls. Cereb. Cortex. 28, 2741-2751 (2018).
58. Badr, H. E. et al. Childhood Maltreatment: A Predictor of Mental Health Problems Among
    Adolescents and Young Adults. Child Abuse Negl. 80, 161-171 (2018).
59. Nianwei, W. et al. Analysis of the Status of Depression and the Influencing Factors in Middle-Aged
    and Older Adults in China. Journal of Sichuan University(Medical Sciences). 52, 767-771 (2021).
60. Xianjin, X., Jian, W., Tian, G., Jinyang, L. & Jinmin, H. Analysis of the Relationship Between
    Activities of Daily Living in Old Adults in China and Chronic Disease Comorbidity and
    Depressive Symptoms. Medicine and Society. 36, 123-128 (2023).
61. LI, X. Chinese People's Left-Handed and Right-Handed Distribution. Acta Psychol. Sin. 268-276
    (1983).
62. Cohen, S., Kamarck, T. & Mermelstein, R. A Global Measure of Perceived Stress. Journal of Health
    and Social Behavio. 24, 385-396 (1983).

Young Adults Via Voxel-Based Morphometry. Neuroimage. 92, 1-7 (2014).

62. Cohen, S., Kamarck, T. & Mermelstein, R. A Global Measure of Perceived Stress. Journal of Health
    and Social Behavio. 24, 385-396 (1983).

* * *

583 63. Yan, H. et al. Measurement Invariance of the Perceived Stress Scale(Pss-10)Between Groups with
584 Negative and Positive Depressive Symptoms. Chinese Journal of Clinical Psychology. 27, 1196-
585 1198, 1231 (2019).
586 64. Jin, Y., Brown, R., Bhattarai, M., Kuo, W. C. & Chen, Y. Psychometric Properties of the Self-Care
587 of Chronic Illness Inventory in Chinese Older Adults with Multiple Chronic Conditions. Int. J.
588 Older People Nurs. 18, e12536 (2023).
589 65. Lu, W. et al. Chinese Version of the Perceived Stress Scale-10: A Psychometric Study in Chinese

590 University Students. Plos One. 12, e189543 (2017).
591 66. Ng, S. M. Validation of the 10-Item Chinese Perceived Stress Scale in Elderly Service Workers:
592 One-Factor Versus Two-Factor Structure. Bmc Psychol. 1, 9 (2013).
593 67. Wang, Z. et al. Psychometric Properties of the Chinese Version of the Perceived Stress Scale in

594 Policewomen. Plos One. 6, e28610 (2011).
595 68. Zhang, X., Zhang, X., Lv, Z. & Yang, J. Physical Activity, Stress and Quality of Life Among
596 Community-Dwelling Older Adults in Shenzhen During the Post-Covid-19 Pandemic Period.
597 Stress and Quality of Life Among Community-Dwelling Older Adults in Shenzhen During the
598 Post-COVID-19 Pandemic Period(3/21/2022). (2022).
599 69. Eaton, W. W., Smith, C., Ybarra, M. & Carles, M. Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression
600 Scale: Review and Revision. The use of psychological testing for treatment planning and
601 outcomes assessment. (2004).
602 70. Radloff, L. S. The Ces-D Scale: A Self-Report Depression Scale for Research in the General
603 Population. Appl. Psychol. Meas. 1, 385-401 (1977).
604 71. Fountoulakis, K. et al. Reliability, Validity and Psychometric Properties of the Greek Translation of
605 the Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression (Ces-D) Scale. Bmc Psychiatry. 1, 3 (2001).
606 72. Jiang, L. et al. The Reliability and Validity of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale
607 (Ces-D) for Chinese University Students. Front. Psychiatry. 10, (2019).
608 73. Natamba, B. K. et al. Reliability and Validity of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression
609 Scale in Screening for Depression Among Hiv-Infected and -Uninfected Pregnant Women
610 Attending Antenatal Services in Northern Uganda: A Cross-Sectional Study. BMC psychiatry.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
611 16, 1-11 (2016).
612 74. Du, W. et al. Physical Activity as a Protective Factor Against Depressive Symptoms in Older Chinese
613 Veterans in the Community: Result From a National Cross-Sectional Study. Neuropsychiatric
614 Disease and Treatment. 803-813 (2015).
615 75. Ma, L. et al. Original Article Risk Factors for Depression Among Elderly Subjects with Hypertension
616 Living at Home in China. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Med. 8, 2923-2928 (2015).
617 76. Yang, J. J. et al. The Prevalence of Depressive and Insomnia Symptoms, and their Association with

618 Quality of Life Among Older Adults in Rural Areas in China. Front. Psychiatry. 12, 727939
619 (2021).
620 77. Zhang, Y. et al. Measuring Depression with Ces-D in Chinese Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: The

621 Validity and its Comparison to Phq-9. Bmc Psychiatry. 15, 198 (2015).
622 78. Zhang, X. et al. Emotional Intelligence Mediates the Protective Role of the Orbitofrontal Cortex
623 Spontaneous Activity Measured by Falff Against Depressive and Anxious Symptoms in Late
624 Adolescence. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psych. 32, 1957-1967 (2023).
625 79. Zhao, W. et al. Depression Mediates the Association Between Insula ‐ Frontal Functional
626 Connectivity and Social Interaction Anxiety. Hum. Brain Mapp. 43, 4266-4273 (2022).

* * *

627
628
629
630
631
632
633
634
635
636
637
638
639
640
641
642
643
644
645
646
647
648
649
650
651
652
653
654
655
656
657
658
659
660
661
662
663
664
665
666
667
668
669
670

80. Lu, W., Chunxiu, F., Qingqing, L. & Quanhui, L. Correlation Between Perceived Stress and
    Depression/Anxiety in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL
    PSYCHIATRY. 48, 697-699 (2021).
81. Ying-ying, J., Dan-xiang, H. U., Wu-min, X. U. & Jing, Z. Study On Pressure Perception and
    Anxiety of Hemodialysis Patients During Covid-19 Epidemic. Hospital Management Forum. 39,
    52-57 (2022).
82. Etkin, A., Prater, K. E., Schatzberg, A. F., Menon, V. & Greicius, M. D. Disrupted Amygdalar
    Subregion Functional Connectivity and Evidence of a Compensatory Network in Generalized
    Anxiety Disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 66, 1361-1372 (2009).
83. Schienle, A., Ebner, F. & Schafer, A. Localized Gray Matter Volume Abnormalities in Generalized
    Anxiety Disorder. Eur. Arch. Psych. Clin. Neurosci. 261, 303-307 (2011).
84. Zung, W. W. A Rating Instrument for Anxiety Disorders. Psychosomatics: Journal of Consultation
    and Liaison Psychiatry. 12, 371-379 (1971).
85. Shi, J., Huang, A., Jia, Y. & Yang, X. Perceived Stress and Social Support Influence Anxiety
    Symptoms of Chinese Family Caregivers of Community‐Dwelling Older Adults: A Cross‐
    Sectional Study. Psychogeriatrics. 20, 377-384 (2020).
86. Wang, Z., Shu, D., Dong, B., Luo, L. & Hao, Q. Anxiety Disorders and its Risk Factors Among the
    Sichuan Empty-Nest Older Adults: A Cross-Sectional Study. Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr. 56, 298-
    302 (2013).
87. Xiangli, D., Weiming, S. & Yefeng, Y. Status and Influencing Factors of Anxiety Among the
    Community Elderly in Jiangxi. Modern Preventive Medicine. 43, 2378-2381 (2016).
88. Yang, H. The Analysis of the Psychological Health Status of Senior Citizens From Nursing Homes
    in Luoyang, a Third Line City of China. The Malaysian Journal of Nursing. 11, 63-67 (2020).
89. Ashburner, J. A Fast Diffeomorphic Image Registration Algorithm. Neuroimage. 38, 95-113 (2007).
90. Wang, S. et al. Neuroanatomical Correlates of Grit: Growth Mindset Mediates the Association
    Between Gray Matter Structure and Trait Grit in Late Adolescence. Hum. Brain Mapp. 39, 1688-
    1699 (2018).
91. Hayasaka, S., Phan, K. L., Liberzon, I., Worsley, K. J. & Nichols, T. E. Nonstationary Cluster-Size
    ARTICLE IN PRESS
    Inference with Random Field and Permutation Methods. Neuroimage. 22, 676-687 (2004).
92. Takeuchi, H. et al. A Voxel-Based Morphometry Study of Gray and White Matter Correlates of a
    Need for Uniqueness. Neuroimage. 63, 1119-1126 (2012).
93. Wang, S. et al. Neurostructural Correlates of Hope: Dispositional Hope Mediates the Impact of the
    Sma Gray Matter Volume On Subjective Well-Being in Late Adolescence. Soc. Cogn. Affect.
    Neurosci. 15, 395-404 (2020).
94. Wang, S. et al. Stress and the Brain: Perceived Stress Mediates the Impact of the Superior Frontal
    Gyrus Spontaneous Activity On Depressive Symptoms in Late Adolescence. Hum. Brain Mapp.
    40, 4982-4993 (2019).
95. ZHANG, F. The Neuro-Mechanism of Exercise Addiction: A Neuroimaging Study Based On
    Multimodal Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Sichuan University, 2021.
96. Kong, F., Wang, X., Hu, S. & Liu, J. Neural Correlates of Psychological Resilience and their Relation
    to Life Satisfaction in a Sample of Healthy Young Adults. Neuroimage. 123, 165-172 (2015).
97. Supekar, K. et al. Neural Predictors of Individual Differences in Response to Math Tutoring in
    Primary-Grade School Children. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110, 8230-
    8235 (2013).

* * *

671
672
673
674
675
676
677
678
679
680
681
682
683
684
685
686
687
688
689
690
691
692
693
694
695
696
697
698
699
700
701
702
703
704
705
706
707
708
709
710
711
712
713
714

98. Hayes, A. F. Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis, Guilford
    Press (New York, 2013).
99. WEN, Z. & YE, B. Mediation Effects Analysis: Methodological and Modelling Developments.
    Advances in Psychological Science. 22, 731-745 (2014).
100. Hayes, A. F. & Scharkow, M. The Relative Trustworthiness of Inferential Tests of the Indirect
    Effect in Statistical Mediation Analysis: Does Method Really Matter? Psychol. Sci. 24, 1918-
    1927 (2013).
101. Wu, J. et al. Neurobiological Effects of Perceived Stress are Different Between Adolescents and
    Middle-Aged Adults. Brain Imaging Behav. 15, 846-854 (2021).
102. Protopopescu, X. et al. Orbitofrontal Cortex Activity Related to Emotional Processing Changes
    Across the Menstrual Cycle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 16060-16065 (2005).
103. Wang, J. et al. Gender Difference in Neural Response to Psychological Stress. Soc. Cogn. Affect.
    Neurosci. 2, 227-239 (2007).
104. Liston, C. et al. Stress-Induced Alterations in Prefrontal Cortical Dendritic Morphology Predict

    Selective Impairments in Perceptual Attentional Set-Shifting. J. Neurosci. 26, 7870-7874 (2006).
105. McEwen, B. S. & Morrison, J. H. The Brain On Stress: Vulnerability and Plasticity of the Prefrontal
    Cortex Over the Life Course. Neuron. 79, 16-29 (2013).
106. McEwen, B. S., Nasca, C. & Gray, J. D. Stress Effects On Neuronal Structure: Hippocampus,
    Amygdala, and Prefrontal Cortex. Neuropsychopharmacology (New York, N.Y.). 41, 3-23 (2016).
107. Zatorre, R. J., Fields, R. D. & Johansen-Berg, H. Plasticity in Gray and White: Neuroimaging
    Changes in Brain Structure During Learning. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 528-536 (2012).
108. Anderson, B. J. Plasticity of Gray Matter Volume: The Cellular and Synaptic Plasticity that
    Underlies Volumetric Change. Dev. Psychobiol. 53, 456-465 (2011).
109. Hunter, R. G. & McEwen, B. S. Stress and Anxiety Across the Lifespan: Structural Plasticity and
    Epigenetic Regulation. Epigenomics. 5, 177-194 (2013).
110. Drevets, W. C. Neuroimaging and Neuropathological Studies of Depression: Implications for the
    Cognitive-Emotional Features of Mood Disorders. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 11, 240-249 (2001).
111. Yang, X. Effect of Orbitofrontal Cortex On Reward Value Coding: UNIVERSITY OF
    ARTICLE IN PRESS
    ELECTRONIC SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF CHINA, 2020.
112. Hanson, J. L. et al. Early Stress is Associated with Alterations in the Orbitofrontal Cortex: A Tensor-
    Based Morphometry Investigation of Brain Structure and Behavioral Risk. The Journal of
    Neuroscience. 30, 7466-7472 (2010).
113. Huang, M. & Jia, J. The Role of Orbital Prefrontal Cortex in Executive Function. JOURNAL OF
    JINING MEDICAL COLLEGE. 28, 66-67 (2005).
114. Liu, M. The Role and Molecular Mechanism of Orbitofrontal Cortex-Dorsal Striatum Neural
    Circuit in Memory Retrieval of Methamphetamine Addiction: ShangDong university, 2023.
115. Vandermeer, M. R. J. et al. Orbitofrontal Cortex Grey Matter Volume is Related to Children’S
    Depressive Symptoms. NeuroImage: Clinical. 28, 102395 (2020).
116. Nielsen, J. D. et al. Trajectories of Depressive Symptoms through Adolescence as Predictors of
    Cortical Thickness in the Orbitofrontal Cortex: An Examination of Sex Differences. Psychiatry
    Research: Neuroimaging. 303, 111132 (2020).
117. Butler, T. et al. Cortical Thickness Abnormalities Associated with Depressive Symptoms in
    Temporal Lobe Epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 23, 64-67 (2012).
118. Eddington, K. M. et al. Neural Correlates of Idiographic Goal Priming in Depression: Goal-Specific

* * *

715
716
717
718
719
720
721
722
723
724
725
726
727
728
729
730
731
732
733
734
735
736
737
738
739
740
741
742
743
744
745
746
747
748
749
750
751
752
753
754
755
756
757

Dysfunctions in the Orbitofrontal Cortex. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 4, 238-246 (2009).
119\. Koenig, J. et al. Brain Structural Thickness and Resting State Autonomic Function in Adolescents

with Major Depression. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 13, 741-753 (2018).
120\. Nielsen, J. D. et al. Trajectories of Depressive Symptoms through Adolescence as Predictors of
Cortical Thickness in the Orbitofrontal Cortex: An Examination of Sex Differences. Psychiatry
Research: Neuroimaging. 303, 111132 (2020).
121\. Qiu, L. et al. Regional Increases of Cortical Thickness in Untreated, First-Episode Major

Depressive Disorder. Transl. Psychiatr. 4, e378 (2014).
122\. Zaremba, D. et al. Association of Brain Cortical Changes with Relapse in Patients with Major
Depressive Disorder. JAMA psychiatry (Chicago, Ill.). 75, 484-492 (2018).
123\. Bechara, A., Damasio, H. & Damasio, A. R. Emotion, Decision Making and the Orbitofrontal
Cortex. Cerebral cortex. 10, 295-307 (2000).
124\. Davidson, R. J. Affective Style and Affective Disorders: Perspectives From Affective Neuroscience.
Cognition and emotion. 12, 307-330 (1998).
125\. Ruigrok, A. N. V. et al. A Meta-Analysis of Sex Differences in Human Brain Structure.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. 39, 34-50 (2014).
126\. Xiaoquan, W., Yurui, B. & Zusen, W. Research Progress On Risk Factors of Female Depression.
China Journal of Health Psychology. 23, 1750-1753 (2015).
127\. Bray, S., Shimojo, S. & O'Doherty, J. P. Human Medial Orbitofrontal Cortex is Recruited During
Experience of Imagined and Real Rewards. J. Neurophysiol. 103, 2506-2512 (2010).
128\. Rolls, E. T., Cheng, W. & Feng, J. The Orbitofrontal Cortex: Reward, Emotion and Depression.
Brain Commun. 2, a196 (2020).
129\. Dotson, V. M., Taiwo, Z., Minto, L. R., Bogoian, H. R. & Gradone, A. M. Orbitofrontal and
Cingulate Thickness Asymmetry Associated with Depressive Symptom Dimensions. Cognitive,
affective, & behavioral neuroscience. 21, 1297-1305 (2021).
130\. Cooper, J. A., Arulpragasam, A. R. & Treadway, M. T. Anhedonia in Depression: Biological
Mechanisms and Computational Models. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 22, 128-135 (2017).
131\. Lu, W. et al. Chinese Version of the Perceived Stress Scale-10: A Psychometric Study in Chinese
ARTICLE IN PRESS
University Students. Plos One. 12, e189543 (2017).
132\. Hanita, M. Self-Report Measures of Patient Utility: Should we Trust them? J. Clin. Epidemiol. 53,
469-476 (2000).
133\. LI, D. et al. Application of Diffusion Tensor Imaging in Cns. International Journal of Biomedical
Engineering. 26, 197-202 (2003).
134\. Goto, M. et al. Advantages of Using Both Voxel- And Surface-Based Morphometry in Cortical

Morphology Analysis: A Review of Various Applications. Magn. Reson. Med. Sci. 21, 41-57
(2022).
135\. HUO, L., ZHENG, Z., LI, J. & LI, J. Brain Plasticity in the Elderly: Evidence From Cognitive
Training. Advances in Psychological Science. 26, 846-858 (2018).
136\. Nejati, V., Salehinejad, M. A., Nitsche, M. A., Najian, A. & Javadi, A. Transcranial Direct Current
Stimulation Improves Executive Dysfunctions in Adhd: Implications for Inhibitory Control,
Interference Control, Working Memory, and Cognitive Flexibility. J. Atten. Disord. 24, 1928-
1943 (2020).

* * *

758
759
760
761
762
763
764
765
766
767
768
769
770
771
772
773
774
775
776
777
778
779
780
781

Acknowledgement

We would like to acknowledge support from the National Natural Science Foundation
of China \[Grant number 82001444\]. We are also grateful to all the elderly women
who participated in the study, and the heads of relevant community hospitals, who
worked closely with our team to ensure the smooth progress of the investigation.

Author contributions

All authors contributed to the concept and design of the study. Dongmei WU, Xiucheng
MA, carried out material preparation, data collection. Song Wang carried out data
analysis. Xiucheng MA, wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Funding

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ARTICLE IN PRESS \[Grant\
number 82001444\].

Figure 1. GMV correlates of perceived stress.
Brain images show that GMV in the right OFC was positively correlated with perceived
stress. The scatter plot shows the correlation between the GMV of the right OFC and

The authors declares that there is no conflict of interest.

* * *

783
784
785
786
787
788
789
790
791
792
793

the perceived stress scores. Scores on the x-axis represent raw perceived stress scores,
and scores on the y-axis represent standard residuals of OFC volume after regression
out age, education level, income and total GMV. OFC = orbitofrontal cortex; GMV =
Grey Matter Volume.

Figure 2. Perceived stress mediates the effect of GMV in right OFC on depressive
symptoms. Standardized regression coefficients are presented in the path diagrams.
Age, education level, income and total GMV were controlled for in the analyses.

793 Descriptive statistics and bivariate correlations for behavioral variables

Tables

Table 1

| Variable | Mean±SD | Range | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1\. Age(years) | 68.46±5.06 | 60-83 | - |  |  |  |  |
| 2\. Education level(years) | 8.45±3.59 | 0-16 | -0.03 | - |  |  |  |
| 3\. Income(RMB) | 3387±1244 | 500-5000 | 0.03 | $0.54^{\*\*\*}$ | - |  |  |
| 4\. Perceived stress | 22.78±6.96 | 10-42 | -0.06 | -0.01 | -0.11 | - |  |
| 5\. Depressive symptoms | 12.30±10.58 | 0-46 | $0.24^{\*\*}$ | 0.03 | -0.06 | $0.51^{\*\*\*}$ | - |
| 6\. Anxiety symptoms | 34.09±7.07 | 1-39 | $0.19^{\*}$ | -0.01 | -0.03 | $0.46^{\*\*\*}$ | $0.73^{\*\*\*}$ |

794 Note: RMB = Ren Min Bi; SD = standard deviation. \* p < 0.05; \*\* p < 0.01; \*\*\* p <
795 0.001.
796

* * *

797
798

799
800

Table 2
Brain regions whose GMV linking with perceived stress

|  | Peak MNI coordinate |  |  | Peak T score | Cluster size(mm3) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Region | x | y | z |  |  |
| Positive correlationRight orbitofrontal cortex | 16 | 65 | -12 | 4.33 | 784 |

Note: MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute; we set at p < 0.05 at the cluster level,
with underlying voxel level at p < 0.001 (random field theory correction).