Modelling the Wind-Borne Spread of Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza Virus between Farms

1,2
Amos Ssematimba \*, Thomas J. Hagenaars1, Mart C. M. de Jong2

1 Department of Epidemiology, Crisis Organization and Diagnostics, Central Veterinary Institute (CVI) part of Wageningen University and Research Centre, Lelystad, The
Netherlands, 2 Quantitative Veterinary Epidemiology, Department of Animal Sciences, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands

Abstract

A quantitative understanding of the spread of contaminated farm dust between locations is a prerequisite for obtaining
much-needed insight into one of the possible mechanisms of disease spread between farms. Here, we develop a model to
calculate the quantity of contaminated farm-dust particles deposited at various locations downwind of a source farm and
apply the model to assess the possible contribution of the wind-borne route to the transmission of Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza virus (HPAI) during the 2003 epidemic in the Netherlands. The model is obtained from a Gaussian Plume Model by
incorporating the dust deposition process, pathogen decay, and a model for the infection process on exposed farms. Using
poultry- and avian influenza-specific parameter values we calculate the distance-dependent probability of between-farm
transmission by this route. A comparison between the transmission risk pattern predicted by the model and the pattern
observed during the 2003 epidemic reveals that the wind-borne route alone is insufficient to explain the observations
although it could contribute substantially to the spread over short distance ranges, for example, explaining 24% of the
transmission over distances up to 25 km.

Citation: Ssematimba A, Hagenaars TJ, de Jong MCM (2012) Modelling the Wind-Borne Spread of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Virus between Farms. PLoS
ONE 7(2): e31114. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031114

\ \\mathbb{A},

Editor: Alessandro Vespignani, Northeastern University, United States of America

Received June 17, 2011; Accepted January 2, 2012; Published February 14, 2012

Copyright: 2012 Ssematimba et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

- E-mail: [amos.ssematimba@wur.nl](mailto:amos.ssematimba@wur.nl)

Introduction

Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza virus (HPAI), Classical Swine
Fever Virus (CSFV), and Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus (FMDV)
are highly contagious viruses affecting livestock and are among the
World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) listed diseases. The
consequences of their recent epidemics in the Netherlands \[13\]
have been enormous and include high mortality rates, economic
losses incurred in implementing control strategies and reduced
exports, and for HPAI, a risk of spread to humans \[1,4\]. During the
2003 HPAI epidemic in the Netherlands, following detection of the
first outbreaks in late February, movement bans were implemented
followed by other control measures. Nevertheless, more farms
became infected and therefore in the second week of March the
measure of preventively culling contiguous flocks was adopted. In
the end, 255 flocks were affected over the course of the epidemic
and close to 30 million birds were culled; in addition, the virus was
transmitted to 89 people causing one fatality \[4\]. Between 80% and
90% of the outbreaks occurred through untraced routes, with the
farm infection hazard increasing in the vicinity of earlier infected
(but as yet undetected) farms \[5,6\]. The sustained between-farm
transmission despite extensive control measures demonstrated the
difficulty of controlling HPAI spread in poultry-dense areas.
The mechanisms underlying the between-farm spread of HPAI

role in large epidemics involving viruses such as CSFV \[7,8\] and
FMDV \[9\]. In the analysis of the Dutch 2003 HPAI epidemic data,
Boender et al. \[5\] used statistical spatial-temporal modelling
techniques and identified high risk areas for epidemic spread. The
same technique of using a spatial transmission kernel was used by
\[9,10\] in studies on the between-farm spread of FMDV in Great
Britain. Although important insights, helpful for the development of
control strategies laid out in contingency plans, were gained from
these analyses, a lack of mechanistic (as opposed to statistical)
understanding of the between-farm spread currently impedes the
further improvement of these strategies. For example, the extent to
which biosecurity measures on farms contribute to limiting indirect

The need to determine whether wind-borne transportation of the
virus is one of the untraced routes of HPAI spread between farms is
apparent. The simplest way possible is that where the virus is
transported by wind from an infected farm directly to an uninfected
farm as has been considered in plume models for FMDV spread
\[1519\]. Otherwise, the dispersal may be through a multi-stage
process. In such a process, the virus may be transported from infected animals to recipient animals by wind during certain parts of
the route and by other means (for example humans and vehicles) on
other parts. Both scenarios require quantitative insight into the
deposition pattern of (contaminated) farm dust.
Davis et al. \[20\] conducted a study on the spread of Equine

Davis et al. \[20\] conducted a study on the spread of Equine
Influenza in Australia in 2007. They concluded that virus was
spread over 12 km via wind-borne aerosols. However, the
significance of wind-borne spread of HPAI is subject to divergent
opinion. This lack of consensus was mentioned by Power \[21\],
who also noted the absence of any testing to support or refute a
wind-borne theory of HPAI spread during the epidemics in Italy
and the Netherlands. This route is often considered insignificant,
but with no serious underpinning based on quantitative evidence.
For example, Swayne and Suarez \[11\] suggest that although
aerosols and wind-borne contamination may have caused some
secondary spread during the New South Wales HPAI H7N4
epidemic in 1997, they should not be regarded as important in the
spread of infection. Yet in the analysis by Power \[21\] of the 2004
H7N3 AI epidemic in Abbotsford, BC Canada, air samples taken
around the infected poultry houses confirmed the circulation of
HPAI in the air outside the barns. This motivates our aim to
quantitatively assess whether, and to what extent, this route may
have played a role in the Dutch 2003 HPAI epidemic.
We do this by developing a model for wind-borne transmission

have played a role in the Dutch 2003 HPAI epidemic.
We do this by developing a model for wind-borne transmission
of HPAI between farms, and comparing its predictions for the
distance-dependent wind-borne transmission risk with the observed transmission risk in the Dutch 2003 H7N7 epidemic \[5\]. In
our analysis, where possible, we use the Dutch 2003 H7N7 HPAI
strain to quantify HPAI-specific parameters such as the withinflock basic reproduction ratio R0. In our model, we consider the
wind-borne dispersal and deposition of farm dust contaminated
with HPAI. Our way of including deposition (that is, particle
settling and accumulation on the ground) is in contrast to the
existing plume models for wind-borne spread of FMDV and allows
us to consider infection risks from inhalation by poultry of the
originally deposited dust that becomes air-borne due to chicken
activity instead of direct inhalation of air-borne dust arriving at
ground level. We also include virus decay, as this influences the
infection risks arising from deposited dust. Our model framework
also allowed us to investigate dust deposition patterns between
farms, which is relevant as a possible component of multi-stage
indirect transmission mechanisms.

R\_{0}

Materials and Methods

In this section, we describe all the processes involved in the
wind-borne spread of disease between two poultry farms. We start
by modelling particle dispersion and deposition and proceed to
determine the quantity of viable virus available in the deposited
quantity. We then determine the distance-dependent risk of
infection for farms downwind of an infected farm. Lastly, we
compare our model estimates for distance-dependent probability
of infection with a kernel derived from the Dutch 2003 HPAI
epidemic data \[5\] that presents the averaged distance-dependent
probability of infection.

assumption for the Dutch situation since these barriers would
reduce the distance covered by wind-dispersed particles.
The GPM used in this study was obtained by solving a

\\frac{x}{u}

The GPM used in this study was obtained by solving a
simplified version of the general Advection-Diffusion (AD)
equation (Supporting Information S1). The classic GPM does
not consider that during downwind motion the dust particles may
settle down due to gravitational and other forces. However, we
consider this process to be essential for two reasons: first, particle
settling reduces the amount of dust moving further downwind, and
second, we will be interested in the exposure of animals downwind
to virus in settled dust. Hence, the first extension we make is
incorporating particle settling, at a velocity v, into the classic GPM
(Supporting Information S1). Particle settling leads to a shift, of
magnitude v x, in the plume centre, where x is the duration of
u u
plume flight. This gives the adjusted model as

\\mathrm{(G P M)}

^(x,y,z)

K\_{z}

C(x,y,z,i)!=!\\frac{\\mathcal{Q}\\big(t!-!!!!/!^!x!/!{}}\_{{\\scriptscriptstyle(!}x!)!-!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

\\nu\ \\frac{x}{u},

Here H is the effective release height, u is the wind speed,
Cx ðÞ,y,z,t is the concentration of material at any location ðÞ x,y,z
at time t, Qt{x=u is the mass flux or strength of the emitting
yxzx,
source, and s2y~ 2K and s2z~ 2K where Kyand Kzare
u u
respectively the lateral and vertical eddy diffusivities. The factor
Qt{x=u
represents the total cross-sectional amount of dust per
u
meter at a given location a distance x away from the source and
223
"# !

C(x,y,z,t)

\\sigma\_{z}^{2}!=!\\fracfrac{K\_{z}x}{u},

\\frac{\\dot{Q(t-x)}\_{u})}{u}

\\frac{1}{\\sqrt{2\\pi}\\sigma\_{y}(x)}\\exp\\left\[-\\left(\\frac{y^{2}}{2\\sigma\_{y}^{2}(x)}\\right)\\right\],\\mathrm{a n d},\\frac{1}{\\sqrt{2\\pi}\\sigma\_{z}(x)}\\exp\\left\[-\\frac{\\left(z-\\left(H-\\nu\\frac{x}{u}\\right)\\right)^{2}}{2\\sigma\_{z}^{2}(x)}\\right\]

are respectively the lateral and vertical dispersion components.
Equation (1) was derived earlier (see Peterson and Lighthart \[22\]
and Lighthart and Mohr \[23\]) and is used here as a starting point
in the development of a calculation of the deposition pattern of the
emitted particles.

ð2bÞ

D\_{\\mathrm{c u m}}(x,y,t)!=!D\_{\\mathrm{c u m}}(x,t)\\frac{1}{\\sqrt{2\\pi}\\sigma\_{y}(x)}\\mathrm{e x p}\\left\[-\\left(\\frac{y^{2}}{2\\sigma\_{y}^{2}(x)}\\right)\\right\]

Deposition model
Particle deposition

Particle deposition occurs as a consequence of the vertical
plume expansion due to diffusion and particle settling due to
gravitation. To model deposition, we first calculate the cumulative
quantity deposited per square meter between the source and
distance x, DcumðÞ x,y,t from the difference between the total
quantity emitted and the part of the plume that is still air-borne at
this point. Mathematically, this quantity is given by integrating the
product of the total cross-sectional amount of dust and the vertical
dispersion component in equation (1) with respect to z from
negative infinity up to zero and multiplying it with the lateral
dispersion component as
"# !

D\_{\\sf{c u m}}(x,!\ !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

D\_{\\mathrm{c u m}}(x,!,!,t)

* * *

The quantity deposited per unit area per second at a specific point
at a distance x from the source Dx ðÞ,y,t is now obtained from
d
equation (2a) by taking the co-moving derivative u of the
dx
cumulative quantity DcumðÞ x,t as

u\\frac{d}{d x}

D\_{\\mathrm{c u m}}(x,t)

D(x,,,))!=!u\\frac{d D\_{\\tt{c u m}}(x,t)}{d x}\\frac{1}{\\sqrt{2\\pi}\\sigma\_{y}(x)}\\exp\\left\[-\\left(\\frac{y^{2}}{2\\sigma\_{y}^{2}(x)}\\right)\\right\].

ð3Þ

An alternative way to calculate the total deposited quantity in a
GPM, by integrating the vertical diffusion and settling rates of
particles at ground level, is described in \[24\].
We then calculate the total quantity deposited per second on a

We then calculate the total quantity deposited per second on a
rectangular area Ahthat is 2a units wide (crosswind direction) and
2b units long (downwind direction). If this area is always directly
under the plume centre (that is, with no change in wind direction
during the time of interest), we obtain this quantity by first
integrating equation (3) with respect to y between the limits ½ {a,a
and integrate with respect to x between the limits ½ x{b,xzb .If
we consider an off-plume-centre location ðÞ rcosh, rsinh at distance
r from the source farm and at an angle h with the wind direction,
the integration with respect to x is between the limits
½ rcosh{b, rcoshzb and the one with respect to y is between
the limits ½ rsinh{a, rsinhza that is,

A\_{h}

^{\[x-b,!x+!b\]}

\\theta

\\int\\displaylimits\_{r\\mathrm{s i n}\\theta-a}^{r\\mathrm{s i n}\\theta+a}\\frac{1}{\\sqrt{2\\pi}\\sigma\_{y}(r{\\mathrm{c o s}}\\theta)}\\mathrm{e x p}\\left\[-\\left(\\frac{y^{2}}{2\\sigma\_{y}^{2}(r{\\mathrm{c o s}}\\theta)}\\right)\\right\]d y.

Carrying out the lateral integration explicitly yields the expression
that estimates the total quantity deposited per second on an area
Ahthat is 4ab square units, located at a distance r from the source
as

(5)

\\begin{array}{r l r}&{!f(r,\\theta,t)!=!&!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

A\_{h}

ð4Þ

Accumulation and pathogen decay
Consider virus particles emitted in a puff spanning a time

ð7Þ

\\lambda

Consider virus particles emitted in a puff spanning a time
interval ½ t0,t1 and decaying exponentially with rate constant l.
The accumulation and decay factor is obtained (see Supporting
Information S1) as

D\_{\\mathrm{T o t a l}}(r,!\\theta,!t)

The total contaminated quantity DTotalðÞ r,h,t available at a
given location ðÞ rcosh, rsinh downwind after time t is obtained by
taking the product of equations (4) and (5) as

D\_{\\mathrm{T o t a l}}(r,!\\theta,!t)!=!A(r,!t)f(r,!\\theta,!t).

"#
Equation (6) defines the model for our study. In order to make a
direct comparison of our predictions with the result of Boender
et al. \[5\] which is a kernel describing the distance-dependence of
transmission risk (averaged over all directions), we integrate the
deposition function over all possible downwind directions and
normalize the outcome. This gives the average contaminated
quantity deposited as

\\tau\_{y}

D\_{\\mathrm{A v e r a g e}}(r,!t)!=!\\frac{1}{\\pi}\\int\\displaylimits\_{-\\pi\_{/2}}^{\\pi\_{//2}}D\_{\\mathrm{T o t a l}}(r,!\\theta!,!t)d\\theta.

and integrate with respect to x between the limits ½ This yields a fairly complex expression and thus the analytical
insight obtained from it is limited. Therefore, most of the results
discussed below are obtained by numerical analysis.
One question of interest is the distance from the source to the

One question of interest is the distance from the source to the
point of maximum deposition. This distance is calculated by
dDAverageðÞ r,t
solving the equation ~0 for r, which again gives a
dr
"#complicated expression. Hence a numerical exploration of the
effects of varying the model parameters is performed in the
sensitivity analysis (Supporting Information S1).

\\frac{d D\_{\\mathrm{A v e r a g e}}(r,t)}{d r}!=!0

Estimating the distance-dependent infection risk for the
receiving farms
Virus amount and infection probability models. To

receiving farms
Virus amount and infection probability models. To
translate the predicted deposition of dust into virus amount we
use results reported by Shortridge et al. \[25\] for the virus titer tvin
originally wet faeces held at 25uC for 4 days. The log-transformed
virus amount in w grams, tðÞ w is given by

\\tau(w)!=!\\tau\_{\\nu}!+!\\log\_{10}w

where a and c are the shape parameters for the fitted logistic
½
curve. This dose-response function is consistent with the
Independent Action Hypothesis \[28\].
The inhalation model. Chicken activities such as pecking,

in units of log10EID50. Subsequently, we determine the probability
of infection of a chicken for a given virus amount inhaled based on
a dose-response curve that we obtain by fitting to experimental
data of Spekreijse et al. \[26\]. We use a dose-response function
(probability of infection as a function of dose) as derived by Lange
and Ferguson \[27\] based on assuming that there is a finite
probability of infection for any virus amount even though the
probability decays exponentially fast with reducing virus amount.
For an inhalation involving w grams, the probability of infection
pw ðÞis given by

1.4\\times10^{-5}\\mathrm{m^{3}f} and another study to determine the respiratory rate of chickens
\[30\] reports a range of 27 to 31 min21. Furthermore, since the
components of farm dust which include faeces, skin and feathers,
bedding material and feed-remains are not equally infectious, part
of this material acts merely as a vector onto which the infectious
part colloids during dispersal. The contaminated fraction ðÞ Fcis
taken to be 10% which is the relative amount of excreta in the
litter attributable to chicken droppings \[31\]. More to that, the
contaminated dust originating from infected premises is diluted on
mixing with (initially uncontaminated) resident dust. The resulting
composition of the dust to be inhaled is determined by scaling the
quantity of the incoming contaminated dust by the amount of
resident dust per unit area in a poultry house ðÞ DResidentto obtain
the fraction of contaminated dust in the total whirled-up dust. The
concentration of inhaled dust is estimated by multiplying an
estimate of the average dust concentration in a poultry house ðÞ C
with a concentration ratio c describing how much the average
concentration is exceeded closely above the ground. We use the
average of the ratios of dust concentrations at 40 cm and 260 cm
from \[32\]. Combining these model elements gives the weight of
infectious material wIinhaled per inhalation as

31\\mathrm{\ m i n}^{-1}

\\left(F\_{c}\\right)

(D\_{\\mathrm{R e s i d e n t}})

w\_{I}

w\_{I}!=!\\left(\\frac{D\_{\\mathrm{A v e r a g e}}(r,t)}{D\_{\\mathrm{R e s i d e n t}}}\\right)\\times,V\_{\\mathrm{m a x}}\\times,F F\_{c}\\times c\\times C.

ð10Þ

The within-flock epidemic model. Upon intake of the
virus, infection may or may not occur depending on the virus
amount inhaled. Given a successful first infection, subsequent
infections at the farm level may occur, resulting into a major
outbreak on the farm. In this study, infection risk is defined as the
ability of the deposited virus to cause an infection of at least one
susceptible bird in a flock and this bird being able to set off a major
within-flock epidemic. For a flock with N birds, the hourly
probability pkðÞ t of infecting k birds is given by

\\left(\ \\mathtt{g}\\mathtt{s}^{-1}\\right)

p\_{k}(t)

p\_{k}(t)!=!\\sum\_{k!1=\ }^{i}\\binom{N}{k}(1!-!p)^{(N\ k-!)f}\\Bigl(1!-!(1!-!p)^{f}\\Bigr)^{k},

where p is the probability of infection per inhalation defined using
equation (9) as p~pw ðÞI.
For a disease which has a within-flock basic reproduction ratio

P\_{\\mathrm{F i n a l}}=1-\\prod{\\underset{t=1}{\\prod}}\\left(1-\\sum\_{k=1}^{i}p\_{k}(t){\\left1-\\left({\\frac{1}{R\_{0}}}\\right)^{k}\\right)}\\right).

equation (9) as p~pw ðÞI.
For a disease which has a within-flock basic reproduction ratio
R0 (defined as the number of secondary infections caused by a
primary case in an entirely susceptible population), where for
R0w1, a major outbreak can occur, otherwise only a minor
outbreak can occur \[33\], the probability of a major outbreak
~k
1
within the flock given k initial infections is 1{. Therefore,
R0
the overall probability of infection of the flock PFinalcan be
obtained from the product of the probability of having k initial
infections and the probability that these infections cause a major
within-flock epidemic as

\\scriptstyle{p}=p(w\_{I})

(10),

R\_{0}

.\\mathrm{S l})

determined by the fraction of new cases that it can explain. We use
the concept of the between-farm (basic) reproduction ratio (as
defined in the Supporting Information S1) to compute this fraction.
Estimates for the parameters applicable to the HPAI

1-\\left(\\frac{1}{R\_{0}}\\right)^{k}

P\_{\\mathrm{F i n a l}}

Estimates for the parameters applicable to the HPAI
situation. General and HPAI-specific parameter estimates are
used in this study to quantitatively assess the possible role of the
wind-borne route in the indirect transmission of the virus. They
are categorised into dispersion, pathogen, host and farm related
parameters.
Dispersion-related parameters include the emission quantity

Dispersion-related parameters include the emission quantity
{1
Q gs (which depends on the number birds on the farm,
{3 {1
concentration of dust C gm and ventilation rate gs),
{1
particle settling velocity v ms, effective release height H ðÞ m ,
{1
wind speed u ms, vertical and lateral eddy diffusivity
-1-1
Kzm2s and Kym2s respectively. The total dust emission
rate (both inhalable and respirable), taken from Takai et al. \[34\] is
{1
0:0122 g hr per bird and the total dust concentration is
{3
0:0052 gm. The average settling velocity for broiler house
particles reported by Gustafsson and Ma˚rtensson \[35\] is
{1
approximately 0:01 ms. The effective release height was
estimated as 6 m, based on the poultry house height of 5 m \[32\]
and assuming an initial plume rise due to buoyancy of 1 m.
According to Berge et al. \[36\], the vertical eddy diffusivity for
-1
outdoor plume modelling is 0:03 m2s.
The pathogen-specific parameters are the decay rate constant

T\_{\\mathrm{i n f}}

\\mathcal{Q}\\left(\\mathfrak{g S}^{-1}\\right)

\\left(R\_{0}\\right)

\\nu\\left(\\mathfrak{m s}^{-1}\\right)

C\\left\\mathfrak{g m}^{-3}\\right.

\\overset{\\sim}{u}\\left(\\mathfrak{m s}^{-1}\\right)

K\_{z}\\left(\\mathfrak{m}^{2}\\mathfrak{s}^{-1}\\right)

0.0052,\\mathrm{\\bar{g g m}^{-3}.}

\ .\ \ \\\ .03,\\mathfrak{m}^{2}\\mathrm{s}^{11}

and assuming an initial plume rise due to buoyancy of 1 m.
According to Berge et al. \[36\], the vertical eddy diffusivity for
-1
outdoor plume modelling is 0:03 m2s.
The pathogen-specific parameters are the decay rate constant
{1
l s and dose-response parameters which depend on the
combination of pathogen- and host-specific characteristics. For a
virus that survives for 4 days \[25,37\], the decay rate constant is
{6 {1
calculated to be 2:89\|10 s. The host-specific parameters
include the number of breathes per chicken per hour ðÞ f and the
parameters that (through equation (9)) determine the probability of
infection given an inhalation ðÞ p . The farm-specific parameters
include the flock size and the basic reproduction ratio ðÞ R0. The
estimate for the transmission rate parameter ðÞ b that Bos et al.
\[38\] obtained using Dutch 2003 epidemic data is 4.5 per infectious
chicken per day. To estimate the chicken infectious period Tinf,
they used data from an experiment in which 7 out of 10 chickens
died (resulting into Tinf~4days), and the remaining 3 survived till
the end of the experiment, here taken as 7.5 days that is, the
average time between infection and depopulation during the
outbreak \[5\]. In this study, these two pieces of information are
combined to obtain a weighted average for the infectious period of
5.05 days and consequently, a within-flock R0 for the H7N7 HPAI
strain of 22.7. For other strains of the virus, R0 may be smaller, for
example, it is estimated to be between 2.2 and 3.2 for the H5N1
HPAI strain \[39\]. Based on 7-days mortality data used in \[38\] and
using a simple SIR model for within-flock transmission, we
estimate that the reported mortality would correspond to an
average number of infectious birds per day in a flock of roughly
100\. To estimate the prevailing wind speed, we used data recorded
at three weather stations ( two in the central and one in the
southern part) in the Netherlands during the epidemic ( the period
th st
between February 28 and May 31 2003) (available on the
website: [http://www.knmi.nl/klimatologie/daggegevens/selectie](http://www.knmi.nl/klimatologie/daggegevens/selectie).
cgi). From the downloaded data, we calculated the average
(minimum-maximum) wind speed during the outbreak as
{1
3:71 ðÞ :0{8:5 ms. Here we use the average and perform a
sensitivity analysis over the whole range (Supporting Information
S1). A summary of all the parameter estimates is given in Table 1.

R\_{0}

(p)

T\_{\\mathrm{i n f}},{=},\\ddot{4}\\mathrm{d a y s}),

\\lambda\\left(\\mathbf{s}^{-1}\\right)

The model predictions presented here were obtained using the
parameters given in Table 1 and the models given by equations

\ {3}.7,(1.0!-!8.5)

* * *

Table 1. Default parameter values used in the model calculations.

| Parameter | Value | Source |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Total dust emission rate,Q | 0.0122 ghr-1per bird | Takai et al.\[34\] |
| Total dust concentration,C | 0.0052gm-3 | Takai et al.\[34\] |
| Concentration ratio,c | 1.03\* | Yushu and Baoming\[32\] |
| Log-transformed virus titer，τv | 1.5log10EID50/gram | Shortridge et al.\[25\] |
| Particle settling velocity,v | 0.01ms-1 | Gustafsson and Mårtensson\[35\];Hinds\[41\] |
| Decay rate constant，λ | 2.89×10-6s-1 | Webster et al.\[37\]; |
| Shortridge et al.\[25\] |  |  |
| Wind speed，u | 3.7ms-1 | Meteorological data(KNMI) |
| Flock size,N | 10,000\* | Thomas et al.\[6\] |
| Effective release height,H | 6m\* | Yushu and Baoming\[32\] |
| Eddy diffusivities，KzandKy | 0.03m2s-1 | Berge et al.\[36\] |
| Infection rate per day，β | 4.5day-1 | Bos et al.\[38\] |
| Weighted infectious period,T | 5.05days\* | Bos et al.\[38\] |
| Basic reproduction ratio,R0 | 22.7\* | Bos et al.\[38\] |
| Dose-response curve parametersα和γ | 4.67and-1.87\* | Spekreijse et al.\[26\] |
| Area per hen(free range)，Ah=4ab | 4m2 | EC\[44\] |
| Sampling capacity,Vmax | 1.4×10-5m3 | Julian\[29\] |
| Contaminated fraction,Fc | 10% | Koerkamp et al.\[31\] |
| Inhalations per hour,f | 1.6×103\* | Pamori and Iqbal\[30\] |
| Resident dust amount per day,DResident | 1.97gm-2\* | Gustafsson and von Wachenfelt\[45\] |

0.0122~\\mathrm{g h r}^{-1}

1.03^{\\times}

0.0052,\\mathrm{g m}^{-3}

1.5{sf o o} _{10}{\\sf E l D}_{50}/{\\sf g r a m}

0.01,mathrm m^{{-1}}

2.89\\times10^{-6}s^{-1}

3.7,\\mathsf{m s}^{-1}

K\_{z}

^{10\\mathrm{{,}000^{\ }}}

K\_{y}

\\beta

6;\\mathrm{m}^{\*}

0.03m^{2}s^{-1}

R\_{0}

4.5;\\mathsf{d a y}^{-1}

5.05;d y y5^{x}

\\gamma

22.7^{\\star}

A\_{h}!=!4a b

4.67\ \\mathsf{a n d}-1.87^{\*}

V\_{\\mathrm{m a x}}

F\_{c}

1.4\\times10^{-5}\\mathrm{m^{3}}

1.6\\times10^{3\*}

1.97,{\\mathfrak{g m}}^{-2{\\mathfrak{x}}}

D\_{\\mathrm{R c s i d c n t}}

\*parameter value estimated from the data in the indicated reference.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031114.t001

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031114.t001

(712). We present the model-predicted deposition pattern for
contaminated dust in Figure 1, and in Figure 2 we show the
comparison between the distance-dependent probability of
infection as estimated by Boender et al. \[5\] from the 2003
epidemic data and our wind-borne spread model prediction. The
fraction of new cases caused by the wind-borne route up until a
given distance rcut-offduring the epidemic is presented in Figure 3.
It is calculated for various choices of the cut-off distance rcut-off.In
the Supporting Information S1, we present detailed sensitivity
analyses of the effect, on the deposition pattern, of varying; the
wind speed (Figure S1), settling velocity (Figure S2), eddy
diffusivity (Figure S3), effective release height (Figure S4), and
decay rate (Figure S5). In Figure S6, we present the effect of
varying the decay rate, the settling velocity and the within-flock
basic reproduction ratio on the distance-dependent probability of
infection.

r\_{\\mathrm{c u t-o f f}}

r\_{\\mathrm{c u t-o f f}}

\ {dot A\_{h}==}4a b)

of infection associated with the contaminated quantity present at a
given location and compare the outcome with observed epidemic
transmission pattern.

epidemic data and our wind-borne spread model prediction. The Comparison with Dutch 2003 HPAI epidemic pattern
fraction of new cases caused by the wind-borne route up until a We calculate the distance-dependent probability of infection for
during the epidemic is presented in Figure 3. farms downwind of an infected farm by combining our model
.In
predictions of the hourly depositions with the virus amount and
sensitivity
infection probability models, the inhalation model and the withinanalyses of the effect, on the deposition pattern, of varying; the
flock epidemic model as described in the Materials and Methods
eddy
section. We use the Dutch 2003 epidemic data to test whether
and
wind-borne HPAI spread was possible and if so, determine its
the effect of
possible contribution during the epidemic by comparing our
varying the decay rate, the settling velocity and the within-flock
model predictions with the observed pattern in the epidemic. As
basic reproduction ratio on the distance-dependent probability of
can be seen from equations (712), for small infection probability
per inhalation the model-predicted probabilities are to a very good
approximation proportional to the deposition pattern (as given by
equation (7)). As a result, in the parameter range of interest here,
Following wind-borne dispersal of contaminated farm dust, we the distance-dependence of the model-predicted probabilities is
calculated the quantity of contaminated dust present on a given practically indistinguishable from that of the deposition pattern.
~4ab) on an outdoor run of a farm. The The comparison in Figure 2 more importantly shows a

* * *

Figure 1. Contaminated dust quantity present on a 4 m square space at various distances from the source for the parameter values
given in Table 1 at the moment that the deposition arising from a 24 hour-long emission period ends.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031114.g001

we conclude that the wind-borne route alone could not explain the
pattern of the 2003 epidemic.
Figure 3 shows that the fraction of new cases that could be solely

\ !,r r\_{\\mathrm{c u t-o f f}},{=}\ 25

r\_{\\mathrm{c u t-o f f}}

role in the spread of HPAI during the Dutch 2003 epidemic
although it was not the only transmission route.

Discussion

Quantification of the dispersal pattern of contaminated farm
dust is of great importance in developing an understanding of the
indirect transmission of livestock diseases between farms. In this
paper, the quantity of viable virus deposited at locations downwind
of a source farm is calculated using a GPM, and the significance of

Figure 2. The distance-dependent probability of infection for the parameter values given in Table 1 and the Boender et al. (2007)
transmission kernel (and its 95% confidence bounds). The calculation caters for the prolonged infectiousness of the wind-dispersed material
beyond the (direct-contact) infectious period of the source farm.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031114.g002

* * *

Figure 3. The fraction of the total number of new infections as estimated by Boender et al. (2007) from the 2003 epidemic data
attributable to the wind-borne route for various choices of a cut-off distance up until which the new infections are occurring.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031114.g003

In the sensitivity analysis (Supporting Information S1), we
analysed the effects of varying wind speed (Figure S1), settling
velocity (Figures S2 and S6), vertical eddy diffusivity (Figure S3),
effective release height (Figure S4), the decay rate (Figures S5 and
S6) and the within-flock basic reproduction ratio (Figure S6). The
parameters to be explored were chosen based either on their
importance to the dispersion process or on the uncertainty in
estimating their values. A further reason for selecting the settling
velocity and decay rate was to elucidate their importance in the
study of wind-borne spread of livestock diseases, given that they
are often neglected, for example in plume model studies of windborne spread of FMDV. The results of these analyses (Supporting
Information S1) reveal the robustness of our main result. In other
words, the discrepancy at farther away distances of the predicted
risk and that observed during the epidemic as depicted in Figure 2
for the default parameter values of Table 1 holds for all ranges of
parameter values explored. This is because, for all explorations,
the resulting kernels have thinner tails compared to the pattern of
the Dutch 2003 epidemic.
Since we were interested in assessing the role of wind-borne

\\left(R\_{0}\\right)

R\_{0}

to 3.2 \[39\], and this consequently reduces the probability of a
major within-flock outbreak although it is within the same order of
magnitude as that predicted for the H7N7 HPAI virus strain
considered in this study. Hence, we conclude that the predicted
risk of infection by other virus strains at farther away locations will
ultimately follow the same pattern as that of the H7N7 HPAI
strain. Due to the lack of data on dose response and virus shedding
for the H7N7 HPAI strain, we used data on H5N1 HPAI strain.
However, the sensitivity analyses performed revealed that changes
in these parameters do not alter the main conclusion of this study.
We conclude that the wind-borne route cannot fully explain

in these parameters do not alter the main conclusion of this study.
We conclude that the wind-borne route cannot fully explain
observed patterns of between-farm spread of the virus especially
for longer distances. This conclusion is robust to changes in
uncertain model parameters. We also estimate that, up until
25 km distance, wind-borne transmission could explain up to 24%
of the observed infections. This latter percentage is subject to some
uncertainty. Nevertheless, this result supports the need to identify
supplementary mechanisms that aid the transportation of the virus
between locations. It also implies that: a) the experienced
neighbourhood transmission was not entirely due to wind dispersal
of the virus, b) virus transportation may either have entirely been
by a different mechanism in a single-stage process, or c) virus
transportation may have been by a multi-stage process that also
involves the wind dispersal. Consequently, in-depth studies on the
role of fomites in the transfer of infectious material between flocks
are essential to develop alternative models for indirect transmission.
The deposition modelling approach developed here is likely to

* * *

FMDV this has previously been shown by Hess and others \[43\].
We have found, in the sensitivity analysis, that both deposition and
pathogen decay have a significant effect on the ground level airborne dust concentration at larger distances from the source
(Supporting Information S1). These findings illustrate the general
importance of considering the survival characteristics of the virus
strain involved as well as the process of particle settling during
plume motion if a reliable assessment of the risk of wind-borne
spread of the livestock diseases is to be made.

Supporting Information

Figure S1 Effect of varying wind speed u on the
contaminated dust quantity present on a 4 m square
space at various distances from the source at the
moment that the deposition arising from a 24 hour-long
emission period ends.
(TIF)

(TIF)

Figure S3 The effect of varying the vertical eddy
diffusivity Kzon the contaminated dust quantity present
on a 4 m square space at various distances from the
source at the moment that the deposition arising from a
24 hour-long emission period ends.
(TIF)

(TIF)

K\_{z}

Figure S4 Effect of varying the effective release height H
on the contaminated dust quantity present on a 4 m

References

285292. Mintiens K, Laevens H, Dewulf J, Boelaert F, Verloo D, et al. (2003) Risk analysis
        of the spread of classical swine fever virus through neighbourhood infections for
        different regions in Belgium. Preventive Veterinary Medicine 60: 2736.
285293. Ferguson NM, Donnelly CA, Anderson RM (2001) The foot-and-mouth

Figure S6 Comparison of the distance-dependent probability of infection as estimated by Boender et al. (2007)
from the 2003 epidemic data and our wind-borne spread model
prediction with default parameter values and: Panel A. The virus
survival was increased from 4 to 7 days); Panel B. The particle
settling velocity was reduced from 0.01 m/s to 0.005 m/s); Panel
C. The within-flock basic reproduction ratio was increased from
22.7 to 100.
(TIF)

square space at various distances from the source at the
moment that the deposition arising from a 24 hour-long
emission period ends.
(TIF)

1. Stegeman A, Bouma A, Elbers ARW, de Jong MCM, Nodelijk G, et al. (2004)
   Avian influenza A virus (H7N7) epidemic in the Netherlands in 2003: Course of
   the epidemic and effectiveness of control measures. Journal of Infectious Diseases
   190: 20882095.
2. Elbers ARW, Stegeman A, Moser H, Ekker HM, Smak JA, et al. (1999) The

Figure S5 Effect of varying the decay rate l on the
contaminated dust quantity present on a 4 m square
space at various distances from the source at the
moment that the deposition arising from a 24 hour-long
emission period ends.
(TIF)

Acknowledgments

We are indebted to Andre· Aarnink, Eddie Bokkers, Gert-Jan Boender,
Guus Koch, Arjan Stegeman, Annemarie Bouma, Jose· Gonzales, Bram
van Bunnik and Dieuwertje Spekreijse for useful discussions, Linda
McPhee for her comments on the manuscript, and the anonymous
reviewers for their constructive remarks.

Conceived and designed the experiments: AS TJH MCMdJ. Performed
the experiments: AS TJH MCMdJ. Analyzed the data: AS. Wrote the
paper: AS. Commented on the manuscript: TJH MCMdJ.

7. Stegeman JA, Elbers ARW, Bouma A, de Jong MCM (2002) Rate of inter-herd
   transmission of classical swine fever virus by different types of contact during the
   19978 epidemic in The Netherlands. Epidemiology and Infection 128:
9. Mintiens K, Laevens H, Dewulf J, Boelaert F, Verloo D, et al. (2003) Risk analysis

190: 20882095.
2\. Elbers ARW, Stegeman A, Moser H, Ekker HM, Smak JA, et al. (1999) The
classical swine fever epidemic 19971998 in the Netherlands: descriptive
epidemiology. Preventive Veterinary Medicine 42: 157184.
3\. Bouma A, Elbers ARW, Dekker A, de Koeijer A, Bartels C, et al. (2003) The

Computational Biology 3: 704712.
6\. Thomas ME, Bouma A, Ekker HM, Fonken AJM, Stegeman JA, et al. (2005)
Risk factors for the introduction of high pathogenicity Avian Influenza virus into
poultry farms during the epidemic in the Netherlands in 2003. Preventive
Veterinary Medicine 69: 111.
7\. Stegeman JA, Elbers ARW, Bouma A, de Jong MCM (2002) Rate of inter-herd

12. Alexander DJ (2000) A review of avian influenza in different bird species.
    Veterinary Microbiology 74: 313.
13. Halvorson DA, Karunakaran D, Newman JA (1980) Avian Influenza in Caged
    Laying Chickens. Avian Diseases 24: 288294.
14. Webster RG, Bean WJ, Gorman OT, Chambers TM, Kawaoka Y (1992)
    Evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 56:
16. Cannon RM, Garner MG (1999) Assessing the risk of wind-borne spread of footand-mouth disease in Australia. Environment International 25: 713723.
17. Gloster J, Champion HJ, Sorensen JH, Mikkelsen T, Ryall DB, et al. (2003)
    Airborne transmission of foot-and-mouth disease virus from Burnside Farm,
    Heddonon-the-Wall, Northumberland, during the 2001 epidemic in the United
    Kingdom. Veterinary Record 152: 525533.
18. Donaldson AI, Gloster J, Harvey LDJ, Deans DH (1982) Use of prediction
    models to forecast and analyze airborne spread during the foot-and-mouthdisease outbreaks in Brittany, Jersey and the isle of Wight in 1981. Veterinary
    Record 110: 5357.
19. Gloster J, Blackall R, Sellers R, Donaldson A (1981) Forecasting the airborne
    spread of foot-and-mouth disease. Veterinary Record 108: 370374.
20. Gloster J, Donaldson AI, Hough MN (1984) Analysis of a series of outbreaks of
    aujeszkys disease in Yorkshire in 198182 - the possibility of airborne disease
    spread. Veterinary Record 114: 234239.
21. Davis J, Garner MG, East IJ (2009) Analysis of Local Spread of Equine
    Influenza in the Park Ridge Region of Queensland. Transboundary and
    Emerging Diseases 56: 3138.
22. Power CA (2005) An investigation into the potential role of aerosol dispersion of
    dust from poultry barns as a mode of disease transmission during an outbreak of
    avian influenza (H7:N3) in Abbotsford, BC in 2004. Bulletin of the Aquaculture
    Association of Canada 105: 714.
23. Peterson E, Lighthart B (1977) Estimation of downwind viable airborne
    microbes from a wet cooling tower-including settling. Microbial Ecology 4:
25. Lighthart B, Mohr A (1987) Estimating downwind concentration of viable
    airborne microorganisms in dynamic atmospheric conditions Applied and
    Environmental. Microbiology 53: 15801583.
26. Di-Giovanni F, Beckett PM (1990) On the Mathematical Modeling of Pollen
    Dispersal and Deposition. Journal of Applied Meteorology 29: 13521357.

Veterinary Medicine 57: 155166. 16.
4\. Koopmans M, Wilbrink B, Conyn M, Natrop G, van der Nat H, et al. (2004)
Transmission of H7N7 avian influenza A virus to human beings during a large
outbreak in commercial poultry farms in the Netherlands. The Lancet 363:
587593\. 17.
5\. Boender GJ, Hagenaars TJ, Bouma A, Nodelijk G, Elbers ARW, et al. (2007)

* * *

25. Shortridge KF, Zhou NN, Guan Y, Gao P, Ito T, et al. (1998) Characterization
    of avian H5N1 influenza viruses from poultry in Hong Kong. Virology 252:

27. Spekreijse D, Bouma A, Stegeman JA, Koch G, de Jong MCM (2011) The effect

28. Spekreijse D, Bouma A, Stegeman JA, Koch G, de Jong MCM (2011) The effect
    of inoculation dose of a highly pathogenic avian influenza virus strain H5N1 on
    the infectiousness of chickens. Veterinary Microbiology 147: 5966.

29. Lange A, Ferguson NM (2009) Antigenic Diversity, Transmission Mechanisms,

30. Lange A, Ferguson NM (2009) Antigenic Diversity, Transmission Mechanisms,
    and the Evolution of Pathogens. PLoS Computational Biology 5: e1000536.

31. Druett HA (1952) Bacterial invasion. Nature 170: 288288.

32. Druett HA (1952) Bacterial invasion. Nature 170: 288288.

33. Julian RJ (1989) Lung Volume of Meat-Type Chickens. Avian Diseases 33:

34. Julian RJ (1989) Lung Volume of Meat-Type Chickens. Avian Diseases 33:

36. Pampori ZA, Iqbal S (2007) Haematology, serum chemistry and electrocardio-

37. Berge WF, Fehrenbacher MC, Jayjock MA, Keil CB, Nickas M, et al. (2000)
    Mathematical models for estimating occupational exposure to chemicals;
    Keil CB, ed. American Industrial Hygiene Association Press.

38. Webster RG, Yakhno M, Hinshaw VS, Bean WJ, Copal Murti K (1978)
    Intestinal influenza: Replication and characterization of influenza viruses in
    ducks. Virology 84: 268278.

39. Bos MEH, Nielen M, Koch G, Bouma A, de Jong MCM, et al. (2009) Backcalculation method shows that within-flock transmission of highly pathogenic
    avian influenza (H7N7) virus in the Netherlands is not influenced by housing risk
    factors. Preventive Veterinary Medicine 88: 278285.

40. Garske T, Clarke P, Ghani AC (2007) The Transmissibility of Highly
    Pathogenic Avian Influenza in Commercial Poultry in Industrialised Countries.
    PLoS One 2: e349.

41. Dawson JR (1990) Minimizing dust in livestock buildings - possible alternatives
    to mechanical separation. Journal of Agricultural Engineering Research 47:

43. Hinds WC (1999) Aerosol technology: Properties, behavior, and measurement of
    airborne particles. New York: Wiley.

44. Aarnink AJA, Ellen H (2007) Processes and factors affecting dust emissions from
    livestock production. How to improve air quality; 2007 April,23rd24th;
    Maastricht, The Netherlands.

45. Hess GD, Garner MG, Yang X (2008) A sensitivity analysis of an integrated
    modelling approach to assess the risk of wind-borne spread of foot-and-mouth
    disease virus from infected premises. Environmental Modeling & Assessment 13:

47. EC (1999) Council directive 1999/74/EC of 19/July/1999, laying down
    minimum standards for protection of laying hens. Official journal of the
    European communities L203: 5357.

48. Gustafsson G, von Wachenfelt E Airborne dust control measures for floor
    housing system for laying hens Agricultural Engineering International The
    CIGR Ejournal BC 05 018. Vol VIII. CIGR.

49. Pampori ZA, Iqbal S (2007) Haematology, serum chemistry and electrocardiographic evaluation of native chicken of Kashmir. International Journal of
    Poultry Science 6: 578582.

50. Koerkamp P, Raaben JHW, Speelman L, Metz JHM (1999) Litter composition


Poultry Science 6: 578582.
31\. Koerkamp P, Raaben JHW, Speelman L, Metz JHM (1999) Litter composition
and ammonia emission in aviary houses for laying hens: Part III, water flow to
the litter through fresh droppings. Journal of Agricultural Engineering Research
73: 363371.
32\. Yushu HE, Baoming LI (2006) Dust Spatial Distribution in Loose-rearing Pullets

73: 363371.
32\. Yushu HE, Baoming LI (2006) Dust Spatial Distribution in Loose-rearing Pullets
House. Available: [http://www.seiofbluemountain.com/upload/product/](http://www.seiofbluemountain.com/upload/product/)
201002/1265359261y5y1g1k5.pdf. Accessed: 2011, 25 May.
33\. Diekmann O, Heesterbeek JAP, Metz JAJ (1990) On the definition and the

33. Diekmann O, Heesterbeek JAP, Metz JAJ (1990) On the definition and the
    computation of the basic reproduction ratio R0 in models for infectious-diseases
    in heterogeneous populations. Journal of Mathematical Biology 28: 365382.

34. Takai H, Pedersen S, Johnsen JO, Metz JHM, Koerkamp P, et al. (1998)

35. Takai H, Pedersen S, Johnsen JO, Metz JHM, Koerkamp P, et al. (1998)
    Concentrations and emissions of airborne dust in livestock buildings in Northern
    Europe. Journal of Agricultural Engineering Research 70: 5977.

36. Gustafsson G, Ma˚rtensson L (1990) Gaser och damm i fja¤ derfa¤ stallar (Gases and

37. Gustafsson G, Ma˚rtensson L (1990) Gaser och damm i fja¤ derfa¤ stallar (Gases and
    dust in poultry houses). Lund, Sweden: Swedish Univ. Agric. Sciences. 68 68.