Bayesian Analysis for Inference of an Emerging Epidemic:
Citrus Canker in Urban Landscapes

2,3,4,5
Franco M. Neri1\*, Alex R. Cook, Gavin J. Gibson6, Tim R. Gottwald7, Christopher A. Gilligan1

1 Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2 Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore and
National University Health System, Singapore, 3 Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 4 Program in Health
Services and Systems Research, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, 5 Communicable Disease Centre, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore,
6 Department of Actuarial Mathematics and Statistics and the Maxwell Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 7 U.S.
Dept. of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Horticultural Research Laboratory, Fort Pierce, Florida, United States of America

Abstract

Outbreaks of infectious diseases require a rapid response from policy makers. The choice of an adequate level of response
relies upon available knowledge of the spatial and temporal parameters governing pathogen spread, affecting, amongst
others, the predicted severity of the epidemic. Yet, when a new pathogen is introduced into an alien environment, such
information is often lacking or of no use, and epidemiological parameters must be estimated from the first observations of
the epidemic. This poses a challenge to epidemiologists: how quickly can the parameters of an emerging disease be
estimated? How soon can the future progress of the epidemic be reliably predicted? We investigate these issues using a
unique, spatially and temporally resolved dataset for the invasion of a plant disease, Asiatic citrus canker in urban Miami. We
use epidemiological models, Bayesian Markov-chain Monte Carlo, and advanced spatial statistical methods to analyse rates
and extent of spread of the disease. A rich and complex epidemic behaviour is revealed. The spatial scale of spread is
approximately constant over time and can be estimated rapidly with great precision (although the evidence for long-range
transmission is inconclusive). In contrast, the rate of infection is characterised by strong monthly fluctuations that we
associate with extreme weather events. Uninformed predictions from the early stages of the epidemic, assuming complete
ignorance of the future environmental drivers, fail because of the unpredictable variability of the infection rate. Conversely,
predictions improve dramatically if we assume prior knowledge of either the main environmental trend, or the main
environmental events. A contrast emerges between the high detail attained by modelling in the spatiotemporal description
of the epidemic and the bottleneck imposed on epidemic prediction by the limits of meteorological predictability. We argue
that identifying such bottlenecks will be a fundamental step in future modelling of weather-driven epidemics.

Received July 19, 2013; Accepted January 27, 2014; Published April 24, 2014

Editor: Matthew Ferrari, Pennsylvania State University, United States of America

This is an open-access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for
any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

Funding: FMN gratefully acknowledges financial support from BBSRC, USDA-ARS, USDA-Aphis PPQ, Citrus Research and Development Foundation. CAG
gratefully acknowledges the support of a BBSRC Professorial Fellowship, with additional support from USDA and Defra. ARC was supported by BBSRC, USDA, the
National University of Singapore, and NMRC. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.

Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

- E-mail: [fmn22@cam.ac.uk](mailto:fmn22@cam.ac.uk)

Introduction

example foot and mouth epidemics in the UK in 1967, 1982 and
2001, different pathogen strains, changes in farming practices or
environmental conditions can markedly change the extent and
speed of disease spread through the landscape \[7,9,22,23\].
Whereas, for example, the spread of foot and mouth disease in
the 1967 epidemic was relatively localised, occurring mainly by
aerial dispersal \[24\], changes in the frequency and distance of
livestock movements over large distances \[25\] led to a strikingly,
topologically different epidemic in 2001 \[7,9\]. Numerous other
examples have been reported of variability in epidemic outcome
upon reintroductions of emerging pathogens. This is problematic,
because rapid decisions about the introduction of disease control
strategies often have to be made early in the course of an emerging
epidemic. Sometimes, options are clear. Immediate control aimed
at eradication is initiated as soon as an outbreak is detected for
certain statutory diseases. Actions against the H1N1-2009
pandemic influenza worldwide \[26\], foot and mouth disease in
the UK \[8\], and Asian soya bean rust in several US states \[27\] are

* * *

Author Summary

Author Summary
We consider emerging epidemics, arising, e.g., when a new
pathogen is introduced in a host population. In face of the
new threat, crucial control measures have to be implemented quickly, yet prior knowledge of the parameters
underlying pathogen spread and transmission is often
missing. Predictive modelling can greatly help in informing
decision making by estimating those parameters from
early observations of the outbreak. The important questions are then: can a modeller characterise the disease
‘‘soon enough,’’ i.e., within a useful time frame, in order to
enact the proper control measures? At what stage of the
outbreak can the future epidemic progress be reliably
predicted? We analyse an outbreak of citrus canker, a
wind-spread bacterial disease of citrus, in urban Miami. The
model succeeds in capturing the main epidemiological
features of the disease, but we find contrasting answers.
The spatial scale of disease spread can be identified quickly
and accurately from early observations. However, the rate
of spread is rapidly changing in time, driven mainly by rare
thunderstorms with very short-time predictability, which
frustrates epidemic prediction.

good examples amongst others of human, livestock and crop
diseases that attract an immediate response.
For other diseases, policy makers and disease control authorities

diseases that attract an immediate response.
For other diseases, policy makers and disease control authorities
may wish to wait to assess the likely severity of the infestation in
order to consider the likely costs and benefits of control; delay may
also be necessary to mobilise resources. Informed decision making
invokes a series of questions about how to make inferences about
the emerging epidemic: what type of epidemiological model can be
used to characterise the epidemic and to predict future spread of
disease? Where are the susceptible hosts and how are they
distributed in the landscape? How is disease transmitted and what
are the values of the epidemiological parameters for transmission
and dispersal? How soon during the course of the epidemic can the
parameters be reliably estimated? How should we take account of
uncertainty? Here, we examine these questions using a combination of Bayesian statistical inference and a unique, spatially- and
temporally-resolved data-set \[28\] for the invasion of a plant
disease, Asiatic citrus canker, in Florida.
Asiatic citrus canker (ACC) is caused by the bacterium

2.6~\\mathrm{k m}{}^{2}

Asiatic citrus canker (ACC) is caused by the bacterium
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Xac). The pathogen can infect a
very wide range of citrus and related hosts, causing defoliation,
fruit blemishing and severe losses in quality and quantity of yield
\[29\]. The pathogen is principally spread by wind-blown rain
\[29,30\]. It is not vector borne, other than by anthropomorphic
transmission on machinery \[29\], but the spread is known to be
exacerbated by leaf damage inflicted by the Asian leaf miner
Phyllocnistis citrella that first appeared in Florida in 1993. There
have been several independent introductions of Xac into Florida up
until the mid 1990s \[31\]. The pathogen was originally introduced
on imported seedlings from Japan in 1910 and declared
eradicated, after extensive removal of infected and exposed
susceptible trees, in 1933. An outbreak in Manatee county on
the west coast of Florida was thought to have been eradicated in
the 1980s, but ACC reoccurred within two years from surviving
inoculum. A new infestation of ACC from a genetically different
strain of Xac was reported in urban Miami on residential trees in
1995\. The disease spread rapidly through Eastern and central
Florida \[29\], triggering an extensive eradication programme,
involving compulsory removal of ,7M commercial, .4M nursery
and 0.8M residential trees around infected sites, at a cost of .$1

billion. The eradication scheme was halted in 2006 following
widespread dispersal of inoculum during several severe hurricanes
in 2004 and the eventual determination that the disease had
become endemic rendering eradication unattainable \[32\].
Here we focus on the early stage of the epidemic in urban

become endemic rendering eradication unattainable \[32\].
Here we focus on the early stage of the epidemic in urban
Miami and, in particular, how to estimate the inherent spatial and
temporal scales of the epidemic in order to predict the future
course of an epidemic in a spatially heterogeneous urban setting.
Infection on these trees constituted a potent source of inoculum
that must be controlled were the disease threat to plantations to be
economically managed. Accordingly, the USDA Agricultural
Research Service initiated a detailed census of susceptible trees
and the occurrence of ACC in five sites in Broward and Dade
2
counties in the Miami region. The sites ranged from 2.6 km to
2
15.5 km \[28\]. The data provide a full census of susceptible trees,
with 24 successive monthly snapshots for the occurrence of new
infections. Retrospectively, the outcome of the epidemic at each
site is known. Here we use subsets of the data at different stages of
the epidemic to recreate different levels of ignorance about the
future course of the epidemic. Then using Bayesian statistical
inference and a stochastic model we compare model predictions
with the known course of the epidemic. Specifically we ask:
N

15.5~\\mathrm{k m}^{2}

NWhat is the appropriate epidemiological model to characterise
the spread of disease?
NIs the epidemic self-contained at each site or is there evidence

NIs the epidemic self-contained at each site or is there evidence
of ingress of inoculum from outside the site?
NHow early in the epidemic can the epidemiological parameters

NHow early in the epidemic can the epidemiological parameters
be reliably estimated from disease snapshots?
NHow does the starting time of observations affect the reliability

NHow does the starting time of observations affect the reliability
of parameter estimates?
NAre the epidemiological parameters constant over time?

NAre the epidemiological parameters constant over time?
NAre the epidemiological parameters similar at each site?

NAre the epidemiological parameters similar at each site?
NHow do the predictions of the future evolution of the epidemic

NHow do the predictions of the future evolution of the epidemic
vary with the time of prediction and the amounts of data used
for prediction?

By using the citrus canker outbreak to address these broad
questions, we introduce and test methodologies that are applicable
to a much broader class of spatially-and temporally-complex
epidemics.

The methods are organised as follows. The first three sections
set the general problem by describing the data used for parameter
estimation and the data collection process (first section), the models
fitted to the data (second section), and methods for Bayesian
parameter estimation (third section). Model selection methods are
explained in the fourth section. In the fifth section, we discuss
temporal-window techniques for the change of parameter
estimates with time; the sixth section describes techniques for
parameter changes amongst census sites. The seventh section
describes goodness-of-fit tests. In the eighth and final section, we
give details on simulating predictive distributions of epidemic
outbreaks.

* * *

system. There were 4730, 1113, 6056 and 6072 trees at sites B1,
B2, D1 and D2, respectively. Each site was visited by teams of
inspectors at successive intervals between October 1997 and
October 1999. The locations of infected trees were identified and
notional infection times were calculated by experienced personnel,
from lesion size and other phenotypic characters. In order to
account for errors in the assessment, the notional times were then
grouped into 24 successive 30-day intervals (effectively used as
censoring intervals for the true infection times). The data therefore
provide spatial snapshots of the locations of susceptible and
infected trees at successive 30-day intervals (see examples in
Figures 1B,C). The incidence of disease increased rapidly at all
sites during the first 18 intervals with little infection thereafter
coincident with the onset of dry conditions (Figure 1D). Further
details of the collection of data are given in \[28\]. Disease was
present in the area surrounding the census sites during the
outbreak, with both susceptible and infected citrus trees between
the sites (Figure 1A; see Figure S10 for a density map of citrus trees
in the area). The data for an isolated small fifth site, also
enumerated by the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) of the
USDA, with a very small spread of infection around a single focus
of three trees, are not analysed here because the small size of the
outbreak precluded rigorous analysis. The effects of ingress of

^{1mathrm B,C}).

inoculum from infected trees outside the sites were incorporated
into the rates for primary infection. Hence, for the purposes of the
analyses, in this paper each site was treated as an independent subpopulation subject to external inoculum, and parameters were
assumed to be independent among sites.

We consider a family of spatially-explicit, stochastic SI models
for the spread of disease over time and space through a fixed
population of trees (N) in each census site. Sites are analysed
independently and for notational simplicity the dependence of
each parameter on the site is omitted.
Infection sources and modes of transmission. The model

Models
We consider a family of spatially-explicit, stochastic SI models

Infection sources and modes of transmission. The model
incorporates two sources of infection: secondary infection by tree
to tree spread within census sites, and primary infection from
external inoculum coming from outside the site. Secondary
infection depends upon the relative locations of infected (I) and
susceptible (S) trees within the site, whereas primary infection
depends only upon the availability of susceptible trees. For any
pair of infected (i) and susceptible (s) trees, the probability of
secondary, tree-to-tree, infection within a census site depends upon
the distance disbetween i and s, and is given by:

d\_{i s}

Figure 1. Census sites and progress of citrus canker in urban Miami. A Map showing locations and boundaries of four census sites in
Broward (B1, B2) and Dade (D1, D2) counties. The coloured outlines indicate the locations of susceptible citrus hosts: there were 4703 susceptible
tress in B1, 1113 in B2, 6056 in D1 and 6072 in D2. B, C Examples of snapshots at two representative times, 180 d, 750 d in site B2. Grey points
indicate locations of healthy (i.e. susceptible trees), red dots indicate locations of newly infected trees within the previous 30 d interval. D Increase in
numbers of infected trees in successive 30 d intervals at all three sites with colours corresponding to coloured sites in Figure 1A. Background image
in Figure 1A provided by W. Luo, courtesy of USDA Service Center Agencies.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003587.g001

D1:180d

B

C

I(t)

* * *

P(i,\\mathrm{i n f e c t s},\\mathrm{i n},(t,!++,\\delta t,\])!=!!!K(d\_{i s};!\ \ !,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

ð1Þ

in which K(d; a) is a dispersal kernel with parameter a, and b is
the transmission rate for infection given that inoculum from tree (i)
arrives at tree (s), for a vanishingly small dt, so that no more than
one infection event occurs in the interval (t,tzdt .
We extend the generic model to allow for external infection,

K(d;\\mathtt{a})

\\alpha,

\\beta

(i)

\\delta t.

(s)

\_{(t,t+\\delta t\]}

We extend the generic model to allow for external infection,
thus:

\\begin{array}{l}{{displaystyle\ \ \ \ \ \ \\\ \ \ \ \ \ \\\ \\\ \ \\\ \\\ \ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\

ð2aÞ

ð2bÞ

\\varphi\_{s}(t)!=!\\mathsf\\beta\\sum\_{i;\\mathrm{i n f e c t e d;a t;t i m e;}t}K(d\_{i s};\\up)+\\varepsilon,

\\mathbf{e}

s
Initial inference is focused on three parameters, the primary and
secondary transmission rates (e and b) and the dispersal parameter
(a). Later estimation allows for a change in b and e over time.
The latent period for citrus canker is short, ,7–21 days \[28\]

\\Phi\_{s}(t)

\\beta)

\\beta

(\\alpha)

The latent period for citrus canker is short, ,7–21 days \[28\]
relative to the timescale for infection, and shorter than the interval
(30 days) used for data censoring. Hence, latent infection is not
represented explicitly in our model. Asymptomatic infection was
also not included in the model. The period of asymptomatic
infection has been estimated around 100 days \[28\], which is not
negligible compared with the timescale of infection. However, lags
in the infection process due to the asymptomatic period were
avoided in the analyses described here (see previous section): the
dataset used for parameter estimation consists of censored
infection times, estimated by pathologists at the time of detection
by back calculating from symptom size and expression the likely
day of infection with allowance for a 30-day error. See the section
‘‘Parameter estimation’’ below for a test of our assumptions about
latent and asymptomatic periods.
Spatial dispersal. Here we consider a variety of models: a

Cauchy

K!(d,!!)!=!1/(2\\pi d)!\\times f\\!(d;!\\mathfrak{A})!!

f(d;\\upalpha)

t\_{i}

\\begin{array}{c}{{K(d,!\\alpha)!=!\\frac{1}{2\\pi d}\\times\\frac{1}{\\upalpha}!\\exp(-d/\\up\\alphaalpha),}}\ {{\\displaystyle K(d,!\\alpha)!=!\\frac{1}{2\\pi d}\\times\\frac{2}{\\upalpha!\\alpha(1+d^{2}/\\upalpha^{2})},}}\\end{array}

in which d is the Euclidean distance between a given pair of infected
and susceptible trees, measured in kilometres. Both kernels in
Equations 3 are isotropic, of the form Kd ðÞ,a ~1=(2pd)\|fd ðÞ; a ,
where fd ðÞ; a is a one-dimensional kernel defined on the positive
real axis (for the kernels in Equations 3, fd ðÞ; a is a negative
exponential and half-Cauchy kernel, respectively). A cutoff at short
distances was introduced (Text S1, Equations S5) to control kernel
divergence. We remark that, owing to the kernel normalisation

d

chosen in Equations 3, the secondary transmission rate b is
2
measured in days21km , while the primary transmission rate e is
21
measured in days (see Text S1 for a discussion of this point).
The dispersal models differ with respect to the patterns of

The dispersal models differ with respect to the patterns of
disease. Whereas exponentially bounded models (such as the
exponential) give rise to spreading waves of new infected sites
(trees), heavier tailed kernels (such as the Cauchy) result in more
dispersed daughter foci ahead of the initial site of infection \[33\].
The introduction of an external infection rate was supported by
the presence of infected hosts around the sites (see also Figure S10
for the population densities), and supplies the system with
additional, randomly located primary infections throughout the
entire plot.

\[T\_{\\operatorname\*{m i n}},T\_{\\operatorname\*{m a x}}\]

Parameter estimation
The transmission (e, b)

ð4Þ

The transmission (e, b) and dispersal (a) parameters were
estimated by Bayesian inference using Markov chain Monte Carlo
methods with data augmentation. Let ½ Tmin,Tmaxbe the time
span of experimental observations, i a host infected at time ti
(tivTmax), and s a host still susceptible at time Tmax. If infection
times were known the likelihood function could be calculated as
follows:

f(\\tt u n c e n s o r e d;d a t a\|x,\\beta,e varepsilon)=

where Q (t) istheinfectiouspressureforhostj at time t (Equation 2b).j
However, the data are actually censored, and the likelihood involves
integrating over the unobserved infection times consistent with the
data: f ðÞ censored dataDa,b,e ~ Ð f ðÞ uncensored dataDa,b,e dt.
The posterior for ðÞ a,b,e can then be obtained by extending the
parameter vector to ðÞ a,b,e,t ,t ,... \[H, i.e. including the unobserved1 2\
event times as parameters, and using MCMC to explore the\
augmented parameter space H \[34,35\] (for recent applications see\
e.g. \[21,36–38\]). The marginal for ðÞ a,b,e is the desired posterior.\
Independent uniform priors over the regions of interest were\
\
\\beta,\
\
(t\_{i}!<!T\_{\\mathrm{m a x}}),\
\
:\\boldsymbol\_{\\psi\_{j}}(t)\
\
\ ddotddot{};;\ \\mathrm{\[0,1\]a a y s^{-1}k m^{2}}\
\
^{(\\alpha,\\beta,\\varepsilon)}\
\
^{(left\ \\right,\\pmb{\\beta},\\pmb{\\varepsilon}\ )}\
\
Independent uniform priors over the regions of interest were\
taken for all parameters, with support coinciding with the\
following intervals: ½ 0, 1 km for a; ½ 0, 1 days21km2 for b;\
½ 0, 1 days21 for e. A Metropolis-Hastings algorithm with independent Gaussian proposal distributions \[39\] was used for\
parameters a, b, e, adjusting the width of the distributions to\
obtain an acceptance rate between 0.2 and 0.4 for each parameter.\
The proposal distribution for augmented infection times was\
constant over the corresponding censoring intervals. Each Monte\
Carlo chain was run for 100000–250000 steps (depending on the\
system size and the temporal window used, see below), and a burnin period corresponding to the initial 10% of the chain was\
discarded before the analysis, to ensure that convergence had been\
reached.\
Sensitivity analysis was used to test the two assumptions: (i) that\
\
({\\sim}100 we compared the default model with a model fitted to a dataset\
where the censoring intervals for all infection times were artificially\
extended to 90 days (with the same midpoints as the original 30-\
day intervals).\
\
Model selection\
The candidate models were compared for each site separately\
\
Model selection\
The candidate models were compared for each site separately\
using the deviance information criterion (DIC, \[40\]). The\
objective is to consider whether or not there is evidence for\
spatially dependent secondary challenge rather than homogeneous\
primary challenge only, then to distinguish between kernels and\
whether or not there is evidence for a combination of external\
(primary) and internal (secondary) infection. The adaptation\
(DIC6) of the DIC suggested in \[41\] was used to account for the\
augmented data.\
\
(\\mathrm{e}.\\mathrm{g}.)\
\
\ mathrm(\\mathrm{D I C}{}\_{6})\
\
Estimation using subsets of the temporal snapshots\
Following analysis of the entire dataset of 24 successive monthly\
\
Estimation using subsets of the temporal snapshots\
Following analysis of the entire dataset of 24 successive monthly\
snapshots of disease, parameters were estimated for subsets of the\
data in order to identify trends in parameter estimates over time.\
We also used the analyses to infer what effects additional snapshots\
or different starting times for data collection would have had on\
epidemic predictions. For subsequent analyses, we introduce a\
classification of the models (Table 1) based upon the temporal\
window used for the estimation (with no reference to the specific\
form of the dispersal kernel) and the number of parameters used.\
The original three-parameter model, fitted to the entire dataset,\
will be denoted with M0. Cumulative windows (model Mcumin\
Table 1) were used to identify the effect of recording more and\
more snapshots over time on the parameter estimates, by deriving\
estimates based upon snapshots for 0–3, 0–6, … 0–24 30-day\
intervals. Sliding windows, for example 0–6, 3–9, …12–18 30-day\
DT\
intervals (model Mslidin Table 1, with DT equal to the window\
width), were used to assess the effects of different starting times for\
data collection and fixed periods of observation on parameter\
estimates (hence, they represent scenarios for later detection and\
initiation of data collection).\
Two additional models were fitted to the entire dataset. Rather\
\
d T!=!6\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathbf{c u m}}\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{0}\
\
{\\mathrm{e e.}}g\
\
\\up\
\
the whole dataset and rates b and e changing by time intervals.\
Essentially, this approach implies: choosing a time resolution (e.g.,\
DT = six months) for the rates btand et; partitioning the whole\
epidemic time span into regular intervals (e.g., for DT = 6 months,\
four intervals: 0–6, 6–12, 12–18, and 18–24 months); fitting\
different btand etto each time interval (in the same example, four\
secondary rates btand four primary rates et), but a single a to all\
the intervals.\
\
18{-}24\
\
\\scriptstyle{T=\\sin\ }}\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathrm{s l i d}}^{\\Delta T}\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\Omega}\
\
\\varepsilon\_{t}).\
\
\\beta\_{0}\
\
\\omega\
\
\\mathfrak{B}\_{J}\
\
\\mathtt{B}\_{K}\
\
Comparison of epidemics amongst census sites\
We assess the hypothesis that parameters vary spatially between\
\
\\beta\_{t}\
\
Comparison of epidemics amongst census sites\
We assess the hypothesis that parameters vary spatially between\
sites as follows. The model is fitted to pairs of sites J and K\
independently (J, K = B1, B2, D1, D2), yielding a sample from the\
marginal distribution, e.g., for bJand bK(and similarly for the\
other parameters) for each of the sites respectively. Under the prior\
assumption of independence of parameters amongst sites, we can\
then build a joint posterior distribution for bJand bK,and\
empirically evaluate the probability pJKðÞ b ~PrðbJwbKDcensored\
data for sites J and K Þ.ShouldpJKðÞ b be near 1 or 0, there is\
evidence that there is a difference in parameter values between sites; if\
intermediate, the joint posterior straddles the line of equality and we\
cannot conclude in which location the parameter is greater. Further\
detailsaregivenin\[42\].\
\
\\mathtt{B}\_{K}\
\
\\beta\_{J}\
\
\\mathrm{e.g.}\
\
t\_{0}\
\
p\_{J K}(\\beta)\
\
t\_{0}\
\
\ kappa\
\
Goodness-of-fit tests\
Goodness-of-fit was tested\
\
Goodness-of-fit tests\
Goodness-of-fit was tested for parameter estimates from\
different types of temporal windows using posterior predictive\
distributions \[43\]. For each time window (delimited by times t0\
and t1, with t0~0 for cumulative windows), a stochastic, spatially\
explicit model, based upon Equations 2, with parameter values\
sampled from the posterior distribution, was used to generate a\
large number (1000) of replicate epidemics, running from time t0\
(with initial conditions set according to the recorded infection\
status) to time t1. Three summary statistics were stored for each\
simulation: the count of infected trees, I (t), and two spatial\
statistics, the autocorrelation function Ct(d) and the ‘‘time-lagged’’\
tt\
statistic R (d), described in detail below. The posterior predictive\
0\
tt\
distributions for stored values of I (t), Ct(d), and R (d)\
0\
(henceforth, simulated summary statistics), at times t corresponding to experimental snapshots, were then compared with the\
corresponding summary statistics extracted from the experimental\
dataset (henceforth, experimental summary statistics).\
Autocorrelation function. We introduce the following defini-\
\
t\_{1}\
\
(\\beta(t)!=!0\
\
t\_{0}!=!0\
\
R\_{t\_{0}}^{t}(d)\
\
C\_{t}(d)\
\
t\_{1}\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathbf{c u m}}\
\
\ \_\\mathcal{M}\
\
\ {cal M}\_{\\mathrm{s l i d}}^{\\Delta T}\
\
R\_{t\_{0}}^{t}(d)\
\
dataset (henceforth, experimental summary statistics).\
Autocorrelation function. We introduce the following definitions: n(d) is the number of all tree-tree pairs separated by a distance d\
in a given census site; nII(d,T) is the number of infected-infected pairs\
a distance d apart at time T (t0vT ƒt1); rII(d,T)~nII(d,T)=n(d)\
is the corresponding fraction of infected-infected pairs a distance d\
\
Table 1. Main models used in the paper, classified according to the time-dependence of parameters.\
\
\\alpha,\\beta,\\varepsilon\
\
\\alpha,,\\beta,\\varepsilon\
\
| Model | Parameters | Number of parameters | Description |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| $\\mathcal{M}\_{0}$ | $\\alpha,\\beta,\\varepsilon$ | 3 | All parameters constant; fitted to the entire dataset |\
| $\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathrm{cum}}$ | $\\alpha,\\beta,\\varepsilon$ | 3 | All parameters constant; fitted to cumulative time windows of different width, all starting at t=0 |\
| $\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathrm{slid}}^{\\Delta T}$ | $\\alpha,\\beta,\\varepsilon$ | 3 | All parameters constant; fitted to sliding time windows of width $\\Delta T$(with different starting times) |\
| $\\mathcal{M}\_{\\Omega}$ | $\\alpha,\\beta\_{0},\\varepsilon,\\omega$ | 4 | Parameters $\\alpha$ and $\\varepsilon$ constant and $\\beta(t)=\\beta\_{0}(1-\\omega t)$; fitted to the entire dataset(except for prediction,cf. Figure 6) |\
| $\\mathcal{M}\_{\\alpha}^{\\Delta T}$ | $\\alpha,{\\beta\_{t}},{\\varepsilon\_{t}}$ | Variable:1+2×(#intervals) | Parameter $\\alpha$ constant,rates $\\beta\_{t},\\varepsilon\_{t}$ changing by intervals of width $\\Delta T$; fitted to the entire dataset(except for prediction,cf. Figure 6) |\
\
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003587.t001\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\Omega}\
\
\ \ ,{{{\\beta\_{t}}},,}\ {{{\\varepsilon\_{t}}}}\\
\
_{\\alpha,\\beta_{0},\\varepsilon,\\omega}\
\
n(d)\
\
t!=!0\
\
{\\cal M}\_{\\alpha}^{\\Delta T}\
\
\\beta(t)!=!\\beta\_{0}\ (1!-!\\omega t)\
\
(t\_{0}{<},T{\\leq}t\_{1});\\rho\_{I I}(d,!T){=},n\_{I I}(d,!T)/\\eta(d)\
\
* * *\
\
apart at time T; rI(T)~I (T)=N is the fraction of infected hosts at\
time T. The spatial autocorrelation function at distance d can be\
defined (see e.g. \[44\]) as:\
\
T;,\\rho\_{I}(T)!=!I(T)/N\
\
C\_{T}(d)!=!\\frac{\\rho\_{I Imathit{(}d!,!{T T})!-!\\rho\_{I}{(T)}}}{\\rho\_{I}{(}T)!(1!-!\\rho\_{I}{(T)})}.\
\
ð5Þ\
\
The non-parametric estimator used here for CT(d) is the spline\
correlogram \[45\]. A 95% confidence interval for the estimated\
experimental autocorrelation function was calculated from 1000\
bootstrapped datasets, generated from the experimental data,\
using a dedicated algorithm \[45\]. Finally, the statistical significance of autocorrelation functions was evaluated by generating\
1000 simulated datasets where the infection status of each host was\
re-allocated randomly (see e.g. \[46\]). We refer the reader to Text\
S1 for a brief introduction to spline correlogram calculation and\
related techniques.\
Time-lagged spatial statistic. When t0w0, the spatial\
\
C\_{T}(d)\
\
Time-lagged spatial statistic. When t0w0, the spatial\
autocorrelation function between all infected trees at time T is\
inevitably offset by the spatial configuration of trees already\
infected at time t0, especially in later stages of the epidemic. It is\
then useful to introduce a statistic that measures the spatial\
association between ‘‘mother foci’’ (henceforth, M), i.e., trees\
infected at t0, and ‘‘daughter foci’’ (henceforth, D), i.e., trees\
becoming infected after t0. We define nMS(d; t0) as the number of\
pairs at time t0 that comprise an infected tree (mother focus) and a\
susceptible tree a distance d apart. At time T wt0, a number\
nMD(d; T) of those initial infected-susceptible pairs have turned\
into infected-infected (mother-daughter) pairs. If spatial dependence is ignored, the probability for any M–S pair at time t0 to\
become an M–D pair by time T coincides with the probability for\
an initially susceptible host to be infected between t0 and T:\
\
t\_{0}!>!0,.\
\
T\
\
t\_{0,}\
\
M rangle,\
\
t\_{0,}\
\
D),\
\
t\_{0}\
\
n\_{M S}(d;t\_{0})\
\
t\_{0}\
\
\\mathrm{(D I C\_{6})}\
\
T!>!t\_{0},\ \\mathrm{a}\
\
d\
\
t\_{0}\
\
n\_{M D}(d;T)\
\
t\_{0}\
\
\\frac{\\displaystyle\\sum\_{d}n\_{M D}(d;T)}{\\displaystyle\\sum\_{d}n\_{M S}(d;t\_{0})}!=!\\frac{I(T)!-!I(t\_{0})}{N!-!I(t\_{0})}!=!P\_{S\\rightarrow D}(T),\
\
where the sum runs over all existing values of d. Under the\
hypothesis of no spatial dependence between the positions of M\
and D trees, the expected value of nMD(d; T) is then given by:\
\
d.\
\
2MD\
where s (d; T)~SnMD(d; T)TðÞ nMD(d; t0){SnMD(d; T)T is\
T\
the sample variance. Deviations of Rt0(d) from 0 indicate positive\
T T\
clustering (Rt0(d)w0) or negative clustering (Rt0(d)v0). The\
same techniques described above for spline correlogram estimation were used to obtain smoothed, non-parametric estimates of\
T\
Rt0(d), confidence intervals for experimental estimates, and\
regions of significance (see Text S1 for more details).\
\
ð6Þ\
\
If there is spatial dependence, the probability of observing an\
M–D pair is affected by d, and the observed number nMD(d; T)\
can differ significantly from the expected value. Such difference is\
T\
measured by the time-lagged statistic Rt(d):\
0\
\
\\langle n\_{M D}(d;T)\\rangle{=}n\_{M S}(d;t\_{0})\\times P\_{S\\rightarrow D}(T).\
\
(R\_{t\_{0}}^{T}(d)!<!0\
\
n\_{M D}(d;T)\
\
\ {-}D\
\
Prediction of epidemic behaviour using estimated\
parameters\
A stochastic, spatially-explicit model, based upon Equations 2,\
\
D\
\
A stochastic, spatially-explicit model, based upon Equations 2,\
with parameters estimated from different time periods, was used to\
predict future progress of the disease. Large numbers (1000) of\
replicate epidemics were generated in each of the census sites, with\
the susceptible trees located according to the original map for each\
site and initial conditions set according to the recorded infection\
status at the time of prediction.\
\
Selection of model\
A variety of models\
\
A variety of models were compared, comprising secondary\
infection kernels with and without external infection, and external\
infection alone. The deviance information criterion (DIC6)\
strongly supported spatially structured models with additional\
external infection as the most plausible at all four sites. We\
conclude that, while the epidemic is largely driven by secondary\
infection between infected and susceptible trees within each site,\
there are sufficient numbers of isolated new foci at each site to\
infer that external infection continues to perturb the system. Such\
disturbance is consistent with long distance dispersal that is known\
to occur during tropical storms \[29,32\].\
While DIC6 did clearly select for the exponential and Cauchy\
\
Results\
\
to occur during tropical storms \[29,32\].\
While DIC6 did clearly select for the exponential and Cauchy\
models with external infection as the most plausible at all sites,\
amongst all models tested in post hoc analysis of the data, it did not\
give decisive overall support for either (Text S1 and Table S1).\
The main reason for this, for which we refer the reader to the\
Discussion and Text S1, is the difficulty in discriminating between\
long-range dispersal, occurring within a census site, and primary\
infection incoming from outside. All subsequent analyses apply to\
the more conservative model with exponential dispersal kernel and\
external infection. We remark, however, that the results shown\
below are very similar when using estimates from the Cauchy\
model with external infection.\
Having selected the exponential model from a post hoc analysis,\
\
model with external infection.\
Having selected the exponential model from a post hoc analysis,\
we now investigate parameter estimation for this model from early\
disease snapshots. The kernel type itself could not be identified\
from early snapshots. Our situation is therefore analogous to a\
broad class of epidemics in which prior evidence would favour a\
particular model (here the exponential, or equivalently the Cauchy\
kernel) and the question is then how soon can the parameters be\
estimated during an emerging epidemics (see Discussion for\
further consideration of model selection).\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathbf{c u m}}\
\
\\mathrm{D I C\_{6}}\
\
Sampling windows for parameter estimation of the\
emerging epidemic\
The posterior distributions for the dispersal kernel\
\
emerging epidemic\
The posterior distributions for the dispersal kernel (a),\
transmission rate (b), and the ingress of external inoculum (e) are\
summarised in Figure 2 for one of the sites (B2) in Broward county.\
The results show the sensitivity of the posterior distributions of the\
parameters to the observation time window (cf. Table 1); similar\
results were obtained for all four sites. Initial inferences were done\
for cumulative windows (model Mcum, Table 1), in which\
(d; T)TðÞ successively more monthly snapshots of the locations of infected\
and healthy trees were added. These results show how the\
availability of additional information during the epidemic affects\
the precision of the parameter estimates (Figure 2A). The estimate\
for a is remarkably robust. There is a short, initial transient period\
(0–3 30-day periods) for which the parameter is not well estimated,\
by the end of which there are fewer than 21/1113 infected trees.\
Later estimates were remarkably close both in expectation and\
\
* * *\
\
C\
\
Figure 2. Trend of parameter estimates over time. A–C Trends over time in posterior densities for Bayesian MCMC estimation of the\
parameters a (A), b (B) and e (C) for a model with an exponential dispersal kernel and external inoculum, based on cumulative windows that\
successively encompassed 3 additional snapshots of data (model Mcum, cf. Table 1), extending from 0–3 to 0–24 months. D–F Corresponding trends\
DT\
in posterior densities for parameters based on sliding windows encompassing six successive months of observation (model Mslidwith DT = 6 months,\
cf. Table 1), beginning at 0, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months. The figures show marked temporal trends in the transmission rate, b, similar temporal trends in the\
rate of external infection, e and rapid settling of the dispersal parameter, a. For each parameter, the gray dashed line represents the prior distribution,\
5 4\
rescaled for display by a factor 10 for b and 10 for e.\
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003587.g002\
\
\\alpha(black\\black{A}),\ \\beta\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathrm{s l i d}}^{\\Delta T}\
\
d T!=!6\
\
\ {dot00}^{5\
\
\\beta\
\
10^{4}\
\
\\alpha.\
\
\\Pi\_{}\
\
There were clear trends in both the expectation and the\
precision of estimates for the secondary transmission rate, b.Asin\
the case of a, the posterior distribution for b had a large variance\
when based upon data for the first three months, and adding extra\
monthly snapshots decreased the variance of the posterior (cf\
Figures 2B,E). In contrast with the case of a, there was also a trend\
in the posteriors for b to decrease as time progressed. The trend in\
b is more appropriately characterised by the sliding windows\
(Figure 2E), in which estimates are averaged over successive but\
DT\
overlapping six 30-day intervals (cf. model Mslidin Table 1, with\
DT = 6 months). Similar results were obtained for e (Figures 2C,F),\
suggesting that both forms of transmission were driven by\
environmental variables. Epidemics were dominated by secondary\
over primary infection: the forces of infection corresponding to b\
were much greater than those for e. Hence, in the following we\
will focus our analysis of environmental trends on the time\
dependence of b.\
The robustness of sliding-window estimates for a to different\
\
\\Bbeta,\
\
\ {mathcal M}\_{\\alpha}^{\\Delta T}\
\
\ 3,1\
\
\ T T!=!6\
\
\\upbeta\
\
D\
model Ma T, and focus on two different time intervals for the\
infection rates, obeying two different purposes. The first, DT =6\
months, is intended to capture the main temporal trend in rates;\
the second, DT = 1 month (corresponding to the highest possible\
resolution given data censoring), is used to analyse short-time\
fluctuations.\
In Figure 3A, we show the posterior distributions for a for the\
\
\\beta\_{t}\
\
{\\boldsymbol{\ \\mathcal{M{}}}}\_{u}^{\\Delta T}.\
\
d T!=!6\
\
fluctuations.\
In Figure 3A, we show the posterior distributions for a for the\
DT\
constant-dispersal model Ma(DT = 6 months; the posteriors\
obtained for DT = 1 month, not shown, are essentially identical).\
Posterior distributions for the secondary infection rate btare\
DT\
shown for model Mawith time resolution DT = 6 months\
(Figures 3B–E) and DT = 1 month (Figures 3F–I). The estimated\
dispersal length (Figure 3A) is very similar for sites B1, B2, D2,\
with substantial overlap between the different posteriors for a, and\
modes ranging between 90 m and 120 m. There is evidence of a\
shorter mean dispersal length for site D1, with values tightly\
concentrated around 50 m. Estimates of secondary infection rates\
btshow a decreasing trend common to all four census sites\
(Figures 3B–I), although with large monthly fluctuations for\
DT = 1 month (Figures 3F–I).\
The decreasing trend in b can be partly explained by previous\
\
\\begin{array}{c}{\\mathfrak{L}u\ \\mathfrak{L} _{\ rightarrow1}}\ {\\mathfrak{L}_{\\rightarrow}}\\end{array}\
\
\ {\\mathcal M}\_{\\alpha}^{\\Delta T}\
\
-\\ln\_{\ },\
\
d T!=!1 secondary rate: six-month intervals\
\
secondary rate: one-month intervals\
\
compared (Figures 3B–I, gray lines) with a superimposed trend\
from the four parameter model MV(cf. Table 1 and Methods), in\
which the secondary transmission rate is replaced by a linearly\
decreasing function, bðÞ t ~b0ðÞ 1{vt , with a, e, and b0 constant\
(and bðÞ t ~0 for tw1=v). The linear decline in b captures the\
overall trend, although monthly realisations fluctuate strongly\
around the trend.\
Sensitivity analyses (see Methods) were carried out by fitting\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\Omega}\
\
\\beta(t)!=!\\beta\_{0}\\big(1!-!\\omega,t\\big),\
\
a,\\varepsilon,\
\
Sensitivity analyses (see Methods) were carried out by fitting\
D\
model Ma Twith DT = 1 month to data for all census sites (cf.\
Figures 3F–I), either including a latent period of 14 days or by\
extending the censoring intervals to 90 days. In both cases (results\
not shown), the choice not to consider latent and asymptomatic\
\
d T!=!6\
\
\\beta\
\
t!>!1/\\omega)\
\
\\beta\_{t}\
\
\\beta(t)!=!0\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{a}^{\\Delta T}\
\
strongly\
Consistency of parameter estimates amongst different\
Sensitivity analyses (see Methods) were carried out by fitting sites\
with DT = 1 month to data for all census sites (cf. There was evidence of strong consistency for posterior\
\
period in the models was supported. Estimates with latent period\
were virtually identical to those in Figures 3F–I; estimates for the\
asymptomatic period, albeit with some minor deviations, displayed\
the same pattern as in Figures 3F–I.\
\
There was evidence of strong consistency for posterior\
distributions amongst sites. This is shown in Figure 4A, by\
D\
plotting joint posterior distributions for bt(model Ma T, DT =1\
month, cf. Figures 3F–I) across all four sites. There is a striking correspondence of magnitudes and trends in btbetween the two\
Broward sites (Figure 4A), which are located close to each other\
(cf. Figure 1A). The more distant Dade sites (Figure 4B) are\
themselves more distantly separated than the Broward sites (cf.\
Figure 1A) and show at first a less consistent pattern (see Figure\
S8). However, if we allow for a 1-month lag in the rates between\
D1 and D2, the two series of estimates display again a strong\
correlation (Figure 4B). Such a time lag would be consistent with\
delayed introduction of the pathogen or the vector, but awaits\
further analysis and testing. Similar, yet more regular patterns at\
all four sites emerge when comparing estimates at resolution\
DT = 6 months (see Figure S9).\
\
\\beta\_{t}\
\
d T!=!6\
\
Goodness-of-fit tests\
In Figure 5, we show the results of goodness-of-fit tests for the\
\
Goodness-of-fit tests\
In Figure 5, we show the results of goodness-of-fit tests for the\
D\
constant-dispersal model Ma T, DT = 6 months (cf. Table 1), for\
one of the Dade sites (D1; analogous results for the other sites are\
shown in Figures S2, S3, S4). Intervals (t0,t1) shown are for\
t0 ~~0, 6, 9, 12 months, with t1~~ t0z 6 months. Simulated disease\
progress curves are able to reproduce on average the observed\
epidemic progress (Figures 5A,C,F,I). The spatial autocorrelation\
function calculated at the end of each interval, Ct1(d) (Equation 5)\
is shown in Figures 5B,D,G,J. Predictive distributions of Ct1(d)\
(gray shaded areas) agree well with the autocorrelation estimated\
from experimental data (thick red lines). Some deviations emerge\
for the intervals \[6,12\] and \[9,15\] months (Figures 5G,J), where\
the experimental function appears to decay faster than the\
simulated function between 100 m and 250 m (Figure 5G) and\
200 m and 600 m (Figure 5J), respectively. The spatial structure of\
the hosts infected at the beginning of the window (time t0) can\
significantly bias the values of Ct1(d): such an effect emerges at\
short distances in Figure 5J, as the value 0 lies out of the 95%\
significance interval for Ct1(d) (dashed cyan lines). A statistic free\
tt1\
from this bias is the time-lagged function R0(d) (Equation 6,\
Figures 5E,H,K), which measures the excess of newly infected\
trees at time t1 at distance d from the trees already infected at t0.\
Significance intervals (dashed cyan lines) are always distributed\
tt1\
around 0. Predictive distributions of R0(d) (gray shaded areas) are\
tt1\
in very good agreement with R0(d) from observational data (thick\
solid red lines), except again for the interval \[9,15\] months\
(Figure 5K; for a possible origin of the disagreement see Text S1\
and Figure S5). Overall, the spatial pattern of the epidemic is\
broadly well reproduced by the model estimates. We remark (cf.\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\alpha}^{\\Delta T}\
\
\ T!=!6\
\
\ t\_{0},t\_{1})\
\
t\_{1}!=!t\_{0}\ !+\ 6\
\
C\_{t\_{1}}(d)\
\
t\_{0}!=!0,,6,,9\
\
C\_{t\_{1}}(d)\
\
\\mathrm{5G J),}\
\
{cal C\_{{t}\_}}\ {bar(({d)})}\
\
R\_{t\_{0}}^{t\_{1}}(d)\
\
C\_{t\_{1}}\
\
t\_{0}\
\
t\_{1}\
\
the beginning of this section) that very similar results were found\
for a model with Cauchy kernel (not shown here). Deviations\
appear when using different dispersal kernels (considered at the\
preliminary stage, see Methods), and extreme discrepancies with\
the data arise when testing models without primary infection (an\
example is given in Figure S7).\
\
R\_{t\_{0}}^{t\_{1}}(d)\
\
Predicting the future course of the epidemic\
Strategic decisions about how to react to emerging epidemics\
\
Strategic decisions about how to react to emerging epidemics\
are inevitably made early on, when few data are available.\
However, it is strongly suspected \[28\] that the main drivers of the\
epidemic (responsible for the fluctuations and the final slowing\
down of transmission rates found in our post hoc analyses, cf.\
Figures 3B–I and related discussion) were major weather events\
that could not be known at the beginning of the outbreak. Such\
lack of knowledge affects epidemic forecasts made from the early\
stages of the outbreak. In the following, we investigate three\
different hypothetical scenarios for early prediction: when no prior\
information is given about the future conditions of the epidemic\
(scenario A), and when some prior knowledge is assumed\
(scenarios B and C). For each scenario, the parameters were\
estimated using observation windows of increasing size, all starting\
at t = 0, and then used to predict future trajectories of the\
epidemics up to 18 months (i.e. for the pre-drought period; see\
above). The results are shown in Figure 6 for one of the Miami\
Dade sites (D1), with observation windows of 3, 6, and 9 months.\
Scenario A. (Figures 6A1–A3) The cumulative-window mod-\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\Omega}\
\
Figure 4. Consistency of secondary rates across sites. Joint posterior distributions for the transmission rate, bt, for (A) the B1 and B2 sites in\
D\
Broward county and (B) the D1 and D2 sites in Dade county. Estimates shown are for the constant-dispersal model Ma T, DT = 1 month (cf. Table 1),\
discarding an initial transient period of 3 months. Each contour plot corresponds to a value of the probability density equal to 0.05 times the value at\
the mode. The two Broward sites, which are located close to each other, are similar both in trend and in magnitude of bt. The two more distant Dade\
sites show similar trends in btonce the window for D2 is shifted forward by one month, and a magnitude of btapproximately 3 times larger in D1\
than in D2.\
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003587.g004\
\
Scenario A. (Figures 6A1–A3) The cumulative-window model Mcum(Table 1) was fitted to the three observation windows.\
The posterior distributions for a, b and e were used to generate\
epidemic trajectories, which were then compared with the true\
realisation. Predictions based upon initial estimates during the first\
three months (Figure 6A1) capture the overall trend, although with\
very wide credible intervals for the ensemble of possible epidemics.\
As new data for estimation are included (Figures 6A2–A3), the\
credible intervals tighten, but at the same time the predictions\
systematically and increasingly overestimate the real epidemic, as\
they fail in capturing the slowing down of epidemic spread.\
As the differences are mainly driven by changes in the\
\
a,,\\beta\
\
\\beta\_{t}\
\
t!=!0,\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathbf{c u m}}\
\
they fail in capturing the slowing down of epidemic spread.\
As the differences are mainly driven by changes in the\
transmission rate, b (Figures 3D,H), we tested whether the\
epidemics could be adequately predicted using model MV, which\
incorporates a long-term decreasing linear trend: b(t)=b0(12vt)\
(cf. Table 1). However, the linear trend is confounded by large\
monthly fluctuations (Figure 3H), and a reliable estimate of the\
decay rate v was only possible when at least 12 snapshots were\
\
\\dot{\\mathcal{M}}\_{x}^{\\Delta T},\\dot{\\varDelta T}=1\
\
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003587.g004\
\
\\beta\_{t}\
\
* * *\
\
Bayesian Analysis of an Emerging Epidemic\
\
Figure 5. Posterior predictive distributions for the site D1. Results for the constant-dispersal model M\
\
D a T, DT = 6 months (cf. Table 1) are shown for four different intervals (each delimited by times t0 and t1, with t1 = t0+6 months). Parameter estimates obtained for each interval are used to run the model 1000 times between t0 and t1, and summary statistics calculated from the output are compared with the data. A, C, F, I Distributions of simulated disease progress between t0 and t1 (shaded areas, with black corresponding to the median and different levels of gray to different quantiles) compared to observed disease progress (red circles; empty black circles mark data not used in the comparison). The total number of hosts in site D1 is N = 6056. B, D, G, J The autocorrelation function at time t1, Ct1(d), estimated from observed data (thick red line), together with the 95% bootstrapped confidence interval (thin red lines), is compared with the distribution of Ct1(d) estimated from simulated epidemics (shaded gray, same as for panels A, C, F, I). Dashed cyan lines represent the 95% significance interval found with random labelling techniques. E, H, K Time-lagged statistics calculated between times t0 and t1, R tt 10\
\
(d). Thick red lines are R\
tt 1 0\
\
(d) estimated from observed data, thin red lines mark the 95% confidence\
interval, dashed cyan lines mark the 95% significance intervals, and distributions of R tt 1 0\
\
(d) estimated from simulated epidemics are shown in shaded\
gray. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003587.g005\
\
used for the estimation (results not shown here). By that time (1 Scenario B. (Figures 6B1–B3) We investigated whether prior year), the epidemic had already slowed down significantly, and in knowledge of the main temporal trend of b (the linear rate v) can the circumstances of wanting to predict future disease spread from improve epidemic forecast. We fitted model MVby keeping v early observations the estimates would be of little practical use. fixed to its known value (the mean of the posterior distribution\
\
PLOS Computational Biology \| [www.ploscompbiol.org](http://www.ploscompbiol.org/) April 2014 \| Volume 10 \| Issue 4 \| e1003587\
\
* * *\
\
Bayesian Analysis of an Emerging Epidemic\
\
Figure 6. Predictions of epidemic trajectories for site D1. Predictions are based on observation windows of increasing length, comprising data\
\
from the first three (A1, B1, C1, D1), six (A2, B2, C2, D2), and nine (A3, B3, C3, D3) snapshots of disease. Three different assumptions (A, B, C) about our prior information on the future evolution of the system were used, each associated to a different model (cf. Table 1). A1–A3 Predictions based on model M0, assuming no prior information. The probability distributions for predicted trajectories are shown by gray shading, with intensity of shading representing probability of occurrence. The observational data (disease snapshots) used for prediction are marked by orange circles, the last snapshot used (the prediction time) by a larger red circle, and the observational data to be predicted by white circles. The total number of hosts in the site is N = 6056. B1–B3 Predictions (same conventions as for panels A1–A3) based upon model MV, with the assumption that the value of v D (the linear decay rate of b(t), cf. gray line in Figure 3D,H) is known from the beginning. C1–C3, D1–D3 Predictions based upon model Ma T(DT =1 month), with constant dispersal parameter a, and monthly rates of transmission (bt, et) (cf. Figure 3H). C1–C3 Predicted and observed trajectories (same conventions as in A1–A3). D1–D3 The associated secondary infection rates bt, estimated from observed data, marked by orange circles (coinciding with the mode of the distributions; cf. Figure 3H). Predictions are made under the assumption that the positions and values of the peaks in the time series for bt(blue circles in panels D1–D3, same as the peaks in Figure 3H) are known in advance. A spline interpolator (dark red line in panels D1–D3) is used to impute missing values of bt. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003587.g006\
\
from the ‘‘full’’ estimation, cf. solid gray line in Figures 3D, H), (henceforth, we refer to the monthly series only, cf. Figure 3H). and estimating only a, b0, and e. While very early predictions Hence, knowing v implies advance knowledge of the behaviour of (Figure 6B1) slightly under-estimate disease (with a very large btalong the whole course of the epidemic. It is desirable to test credible interval), including more snapshots for estimation leads to epidemic predictions under alternative, more parsimonious consistent improvement of the forecast (Figures 6B2,B3). Hence, assumptions about our prior information on bt. information about a single parameter, v, leads to a stark Scenario C. (Figures 6C1–C3, 6D1–D3) We assumed to have improvement of disease prediction. We remark, however, that it prior information about the time of occurrence and values of the was not possible to identify a single, clear environmental factor three peaks of bt(cf. Figure 3H); no prior information was given responsible for the overall decreasing trend of the time series about the drought period. We fitted to the observation windows a\
\
PLOS Computational Biology \| [www.ploscompbiol.org](http://www.ploscompbiol.org/) April 2014 \| Volume 10 \| Issue 4 \| e1003587\
\
* * *\
\
D\
constant-dispersal model Ma Twith monthly-varying rates\
(DT = 1 month, cf. Figures 3F–I). In Figures 6D1–D3, the modes\
of the estimated monthly values of bt(orange circles) are shown for\
each observation window together with the peak values of bt(blue\
circles) that are known in advance (same values as in Figure 3H).\
In order to impute the missing values of bt, a spline interpolator\
(dark red line) was built from all the known and estimated values of\
bt. The missing values of etwere assumed to be constant and equal\
to the average of etover the observation window. Predictions\
based on the first three months (Figure 6C1, with corresponding\
estimates for btin Figure 6D1) capture the future progress of\
disease, with a smaller credible interval than for scenarios A and B\
(cf. Figures 6A1, B1). Increasing the observation window to six and\
nine snapshots does not have a significant effect on forecast\
(Figures 6C2–C3), as most of the additional true values of bt\
(orange circles starting from month 4 in Figures 6D2–D3) are\
already well imputed from the first three months (cf. corresponding times in Figure 6D1, dark red line). We conclude that\
knowledge of the peak values of bt, supplemented by a few early\
stage observations, provide enough information to predict the\
future course of the epidemic. Among the different scenarios we\
investigated (including several not discussed here), we found\
scenario C to correspond to the minimal amount of extra\
information that could produce reliable predictions from the early\
stages.\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\alpha}^{\\Delta T}\
\
(var!Delta!\ !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!\\
\
\\beta\_{\\mathrm{t}}\
\
\\up beta{}mathfrak\_g\
\
\\up beta{}mathfrak\_f,\
\
\\beta\_{\\mathrm{t}}.\
\
\\up\_{\\mathrm{t}}\
\
\\varepsilon\_{\\mathrm{t}}\
\
\\upbeta\_{\\mathrm{t}}\
\
\\up up\_beta{\\mathrm{t}}\
\
4\
\
\\B\_{\\mathrm{t}}\
\
Discussion\
\
Chief amongst the concerns of policy makers concerned with\
managing an emerging epidemic are: how far and how fast is the\
epidemic spreading? How reliable are future predictions of the\
epidemic severity? Does the epidemic merit the deployment of\
control, and how should this be optimised? Here we have focused\
on the first two questions about estimation and prediction, using a\
combination of Bayesian statistical inference and data for the\
spread of citrus canker in urban Miami. We assumed that little was\
known about the pathogen, using non-informative priors for the\
parameters and a selection of dispersal kernels. Our analyses have\
shown that the same spatio-temporal, stochastic model is able to\
capture the temporal trends and spatial statistics characterising the\
spread of infection in all four sites. Pathogen spread within sites is\
described by an exponential dispersal kernel with a time-varying\
transmission rate augmented by a small, time-varying rate of\
external infection. We show, therefore, that epidemics were not\
self-contained within sites but new foci of infection also arose from\
external inoculum, a phenomenon evident at all four sites.\
The estimation of dispersal and transmission parameters for\
\
Models with short-range dispersal (exponential kernel) and longrange dispersal (Cauchy kernel) together with external primary\
infection were compared using DIC tests (DIC6, cf. Table S1 and\
Text S1). Table S1 shows no significant differences between the\
exponential and Cauchy models, except for site D1, for which the\
exponential model is favoured. For the other census sites, the two\
\
\ mathrm(\\mathrm{D I C}{}\_{6},\
\
models are essentially equivalent. This result can be explained in\
two steps, first by analysing dispersal at short distances (Figure 7),\
then by considering the contribution of external infection at longer\
distances (Figure S1). Figure 7 shows a direct comparison of\
estimated exponential and Cauchy kernels, plotted as a function of\
distance for each census site. The pattern is qualitatively similar for\
all census sites: the two kernels are substantially identical up to\
distances of a few hundred metres (‘‘plus’’ signs in Figure 7): 250–\
300 m for all the sites bar D1, and,150 m for site D1 (Figure 7C:\
this may be a reason why the DIC tests favours the exponential\
kernel for this site). Beyond those distances, which correspond to a\
fraction of the size of the census site (1 km–4 km), the relative\
difference between the two kernels increases rapidly. Hence, in\
principle it should still be possible to detect the effect of such\
difference in estimates from spatio-temporal maps of disease.\
However, the long-distance divergence between the two kernels is\
balanced by the primary infection rate e. This is shown with an\
illustrative example in Figure S1 (see also Text S1 for details),\
where exponential and Cauchy kernels are used to generate spatial\
maps of the infectious pressure from a given experimental\
snapshot of site D2 (Figure S1(A)). When only secondary infection\
is considered, clear differences between the two kernels emerge at\
long distances (Figures S1(B–C)), but the differences disappear,\
yielding virtually identical maps, when adding the effect of the\
external infection rate e (Figures S1(D–E)). We draw the following\
conclusion: that the scale of our observations is too small to choose\
unambiguously between the two dispersal kernels, as the potential\
effect of long-range dispersal within a census site is confounded by\
the presence of external infection. Gottwald et al. \[53\] found that a\
power law dispersal model was superior to an exponential model\
for the spread of ACC in 203 citrus plots in Brazil, following the\
introduction of the leaf miner. In the absence of the leaf miner,\
however, dispersal of ACC was adequately described by an\
exponential model, which is in agreement with our findings;\
moreover, none of the models considered in \[53\] included external\
infection.\
We remarked in the results that support for the exponential and\
\
We remarked in the results that support for the exponential and\
Cauchy model was found in post hoc analyses of the data. Model\
comparison from early snapshots supported in general spatially\
structured models with external infection, but could not select a\
dispersal kernel (most of the kernels tried, see e.g. Text S1,\
performed equally well). The choice of an exponential kernel for\
early estimations (Figure 2) would then be motivated by a strong\
prior belief on disease dispersal (for example, from results in the\
absence of the leaf miner in \[53\]). Here, we also note that, in our\
case, the absence of such a prior belief would be of little\
importance, as the exact form of the kernel would not affect the\
main results of Figure 2. Of the several kernels tried for the first\
few snapshots, most (e.g. the Gaussian, Text S1) produced\
estimates of dispersal scale and infection rates with patterns in\
time qualitatively very similar to those in Figure 2 (results not\
shown here).\
Successful control of disease depends upon matching the scale of\
\
* * *\
\
Figure 7. Dispersal kernels as a function of distance. A–D Estimated kernels for the exponential model (orange lines) and the Cauchy model\
(cyan lines), plotted together as a function of distance for each census site. The functional form of the kernels is based upon Equations 3, with a cut-\
D\
off at very short distances as explained in Text S1 (Equations S5). The mean of the posterior distribution for a for model Ma T(DT = 6 months; cf.\
Figure 3A for the exponential model) is used as a point estimate to plot each kernel. The value of the two kernels at the point where they begin to\
3\
diverge (‘‘plus’’ symbol in A–D) is about 10 times the value at very short distances.\
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003587.g007\
\
\\mathcal{M}\_{\\scriptstyle\\alpha}^{\ \ \ \ }(\\var T T{=}6\
\
10^{3}\
\
parameter changed very little over time (Figure 2D): this motivated\
consideration of a new, simpler model where dispersal was\
D\
constant throughout the epidemic (Ma T, Table 1). The robustness\
of the results for the dispersal scale was confirmed by goodness of\
fit tests, in which the posterior predictive distribution of several test\
statistics showed close concordance with the observed statistics\
(Figure 5 and Figures S2,S3,S4). The evidence that the dispersal\
parameter (almost identical for three out of four census sites,\
Figure 3A) did not change significantly over time, and the fact that\
this parameter was estimated with substantial precision with few\
snapshots, are encouraging results in view of control decisions\
where the scale of control depends on the scale of dispersal \[54–\
56\].\
In contrast with the dispersal parameter, estimates for the\
\
(\\mathcal{M}\_{alpha^^{{T}}}^{\\Delta T{}\
\
56\].
In contrast with the dispersal parameter, estimates for the
transmission rates (b, e) were not constant (Figures 2E,F and
Figures 3B–I), with the secondary transmission rate b showing
substantial month to month fluctuations (Figures 3F–H). This
result bears two consequences: first, it can frustrate control efforts
based on the assumption of a single, intrinsic transmission rate
\[56\]. Second, prediction of future disease severity (upon which the
decision to apply control is made) is difficult and prone to
systematic error (Figure 6). We suggested that both b and e were
driven by environmental variables that affected the infectivity, and
possibly the susceptibility, of the host. Accordingly, we found
strong evidence of a time pattern similar among all the census sites
for the transmission rate b (Figures 3–4; see also Figures S8, S9).
Savill et al. \[55\] explored analogous problems for the infectiousness
of infected premises in the 2001 UK foot and mouth epidemic,
and identified missing and inaccurate data as a rate-limiting step in
refining parameter estimates. For ACC, the principal environmental variables that are likely to influence the pathogen, Xac, and
the disease are known to be wind-speed, rain and temperature
\[29,30,32\]. Extreme weather events have indeed been identified,
with robust statistical evidence \[28\], as the main determinants of
the pattern of b (Figures 3F–H): major rainstorm events, acting as
environmental pulses, were linked to peaks in the monthly series of
transmission rates, and a drought was responsible for the strong
quenching of the rates in the second half of the observation period.
The existence of a common external driver is also supported
(Figure 4 and Figure S9) by the close similarities in the temporal
patterns of transmission rates across different sites. Nevertheless,
extensive exploratory analysis using environmental data for
temperature, wind and rain as covariates did not succeed in
identifying a mechanistic environmentally-driven model for b.

(\\beta,;\\varepsilon)

\\beta

Xmathrm c,

6),

\ beta.

\\overline{{\\beta}}

This was due in part to the (largely unknown) time-lags in the
effect of weather events on the pathogen and the host. It is also
reasonable to assume that environmental, weather-related forcing
was just one, if the most important, of the factors affecting the
behaviour of b. Factors intrinsic to the host population might also
have played an important role: tree age, cultivar, and horticultural
care can affect the susceptibility to the disease \[28\]. In a
population of residential trees, the distribution of such individual
factors is extremely heterogeneous in space at several scales, and
also fluctuates over time. In the present case, as a result, there was
a high degree of spatio-temporal variability in the response of hosts
to weather drivers. Fitting models with explicit individual factors is
unfeasible in such a highly heterogeneous scenario; however, such
a class of models might be very useful in future analyses of
outbreaks within commercial citrus plantations, where host
properties are more consistently distributed.
We showed that, in retrospect, advance knowledge of major

properties are more consistently distributed.
We showed that, in retrospect, advance knowledge of major
weather events would have been required in order to forecast
future epidemic progress. Our methods, based on limitedinformation forecast scenarios, should be applicable more
generally, e.g., to windborne diseases where transmission is mostly
driven by strong weather changes. In our analysis (Figure 6),
predictions based upon initial estimates, ignoring large weatherrelated fluctuations in transmission rates (Figures 3E–I), showed
progressively more deviation from the actual outcome as more
epidemic snapshots were included in the estimation (scenario A,
Figures 6A1–A3). Post facto predictions were effective only when
the assumption of complete ignorance of the future was waived
(scenarios B and C, Figures 6B1–B3, 6C1–C6), and some extra
information, corresponding to major environmental events, was
known in advance (i.e., the drought period and the amplitude of
the fluctuations in b in scenario B; the peaks of b in scenario C). At
the same time, of course, meteorological predictability imposes
drastic constraints on prior knowledge of that kind. For example,
the evolution of position, intensity, and heavier rainfall areas of
supercell thunderstorms (two of which were most likely responsible
for the first two peaks in the time series for b) can currently not be
predicted with more than 2 hours lead time \[57\]. We can then
draw a more general conclusion from our results: that the spatial
and temporal scales for prediction must be chosen carefully, not
only to match the scales of disease spread \[54–56\], but also with
respect to the scales of the weather events that might affect the
spread. The spatial and temporal scales considered here (a few km
and ,1 y, respectively) proved to be ‘‘too small’’ for prediction: at

\\upbeta those scales, the model output is extremely sensitive to the number
and timing of isolated rare weather events (i.e., the effect of those
events could not be averaged out). An important question that
arises is whether or not our results could be up-scaled: that is, how
prediction would perform over larger (e.g., state-wide) spatial
scales and longer (e.g., decadal) temporal scales, using the
parameter values calculated here and weather templates (cf.
\[58\]) to generate time series for transmission rates. This is the
object of ongoing investigation.
Finally, while the lack of predictability is disappointing, it bears

object of ongoing investigation.
Finally, while the lack of predictability is disappointing, it bears
an important broader warning, namely that if a component of an
epidemic—pathogen, vector or host—is affected by weather, or
climate, but that relationship is poorly understood and there are
insufficient long-term data, prediction of the future evolution of
the epidemic can be both challenging and prone to systematic
error. Our system was mainly driven by stochastic weather events
occurring on very short time scales. At longer scales, we can
consider influenza and mosquito-borne diseases as further
contrasting illustrations. Following recent evidence \[59\] that
absolute humidity is a strong driver of the rates of transmission
and survival of the influenza virus, a framework to predict seasonal
outbreaks of influenza was recently proposed \[60\]. With daily
climatological data and real-time population disease status as
inputs, retrospective forecasts could predict historical peaks of
influenza outbreak with good accuracy seven weeks in advance
\[60\]. While this case concerns short-term seasonal changes in
weather, longer-term changes are also known to influence the risk
and spread of disease. The importance of climate on the spread of
mosquito-borne diseases is broadly accepted \[61–63\] though very
complex and not fully understood \[64–66\]. Large scale weather
anomalies, such as unusually long rain \[67\] or drought periods
\[68,69\], can lead to unpredictable vector densities, which in turn
frustrates public health planning \[70\]. Global climate change is
expected to increase the frequency and intensity of unpredictable
extreme weather events, with a far-reaching projected impact on
many infectious diseases \[70\]. In the face of such future challenges,
it will be increasingly important for epidemiologists to explore and
identify the external factors limiting the predictive capability of
their models.

Supporting Information
Figure S1 Mapping infectious pressure from primary

Figure S1 Mapping infectious pressure from primary
and secondary sources. A Snapshot of census site D2 at 150
days. The density of susceptible hosts is in gray scale; overlapped
red circles are infected hosts. The infectious pressure on
susceptible hosts comes from two contributions: secondary sources
(red circles) and external sources. B, C Infectious pressure from
secondary sources only. Maps of the infectious pressure integrated
over 30 days (equal to the expected density of new infections),
estimated for the E model (panel B) and for the C model (panel C).
Differences between the two models are evident in the top region
of the system, far away from the secondary sources. D, E
Infectious pressure from primary and secondary sources. Maps of
the integrated infectious pressure, estimated for the E model (panel
D) and for the C model (panel E). The differences between the two
models disappear when primary infection is taken into account.
See Text S1 for a description of the methods used to build the
maps and a detailed discussion.
(TIF)

(TIF)

\\mathcal{M}\_{\\u{}}^{\\Delta T},\ \ \\Delta\ {T}\ {\ =}\

C\_{t\_{1}},({bf B},,{\\bf D},,{\\bf G},\\bf{J})

N = 4730), spatial autocorrelation function Ct1(B, D, G, J), and
tt10
time-lagged statistic R (E, H, K) are shown, for intervals (0, 6)
months (A, B), (3, 9) months (C, D, E), (6, 12) months (F, G, H),
(9, 15) months (I, J, K). Symbols and conventions are the same as
for Figure 5.
(TIF)

(\\mathtt{A},\\mathtt{C},\\mathtt{F},\\mathtt{I};

R\_{t\_{0}}^{t\_{1}}\ ({\\bf E},,{\\bf H},,{\\bf K})

Figure S3 Posterior predictive distributions for site B2.
Predictive distributions are calculated from estimates for model
DT
Ma, DT = 6 months (same as Figure 5). Predictive distributions
for disease progress (A, C, F, I; the total number of hosts being
N = 1113), spatial autocorrelation function Ct1(B, D, G, J), and
tt10
time-lagged statistic R (E, H, K) are shown, for intervals (0, 6)
months (A, B), (3, 9) months (C, D, E), (6, 12) months (F, G, H),
(9, 15) months (I, J, K). Symbols and conventions are the same as
for Figure 5.
(TIF)

(\\mathbf{F},\\mathbf{G},\\mathbf{H}),

\\mathcal{M} _{\\u{}_{u}}^{\\Delta T},\\mathitDelta\ {T}\ {\ {=}}\

C\_{t\_{1}},({\\tt B},{\\tt D},{\\tt G},{\\tt J}).

({\\bf A},,{\\bf C},,{\\bf F},,{\\bf I};

R\_{t\_{0}}^{t\_{1}}\ ({\\bf E},,{\\bf H},,{\\bf K})

(\\mathbf{F},\\mathbf{G},\\mathbf{H}),

Figure S4 Posterior predictive distributions for site D2.
Predictive distributions are calculated from estimates for model
DT
Ma, DT = 6 months (same as Figure 5). Predictive distributions
for disease progress (A, C, F, I; the total number of hosts being
N = 6072), spatial autocorrelation function Ct1(B, D, G, J), and
t10
time-lagged statistic Rt(E, H, K) are shown, for intervals (0, 6)
months (A, B), (3, 9) months (C, D, E), (6, 12) months (F, G, H),
(9, 15) months (I, J, K). Symbols and conventions are the same as
for Figure 5.
(TIF)

\\mathcal{M} _{\\u{}_{u}}^{\\Delta T},\\mathitDelta\ {T}{=}6

\\scriptstyle{mathrm N=6672})

Figure S5 Posterior predictive distributions for site D1:
intermediate times. Autocorrelation Ct T(A–C; 1–3) and timet1 D
lagged statistic Rt0(A–C; 4–6) (model Ma, DT = 6 months, cf.
Figure 5) for three time intervals (3–9 months, A1–A6; 6–12
months, B1–B6; 9–15 months, C1–C6), shown at two (A–C; 1, 4),
four (A–C; 2, 5), and six months (A–C; 3, 6) from the beginning of
each interval. The end-of-interval (six-month) plots are the same as
those in Figure 5, while within-interval plots show the evolution of
spatial summary statistics. See Text S1 for a discussion.
(TIF)
Figure S6 Posterior predictive distributions for site D2:

C\_{t}\ ((mathbfmathbf{A}!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

R\_{t\_{0}}^{t\_{1}}\ ({\\bf E},,{\\bf H},,{\\bf K})

R\_{t\_{n}}^{t\_{1}}~(\\mathbf{A}\ \\mathbf{-C};\ \\mathbf{{4}6})

\\mathcal{M}\_{\\scriptscriptstyle\\alpha}^{\\Delta T},,\\varDelta T!=!6

C{\\underline{{boldsymbol C{}\_{t}}}}\ (\\mathbf{A},\\mathbf{B},,\\mathbf{C})

Figure S6 Posterior predictive distributions for site D2:
intermediate times. Autocorrelation Ct(A, B, C) and timet1 DT
lagged statistic Rt0(D, E, F) (model Ma, DT = 6 months) for
estimation interval (3, 9) months, at two (A, D), four (B, E), and six
months (C, F) from the beginning of the interval. Discrepancies
between experimental (red lines) and simulated (grey shaded area)
spatial statistics, explained by a lag of the experimental statistics,
are solved by artificially shifting forward by two months the
experimental autocorrelation function (J, H) and the experimental
time-lagged statistics (I, J). See Text S1 for a detailed explanation.
(TIF)

\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathfrak{a}}^{\\Delta T},::\\varDelta T\ {=}\

C\_{t\_{1}}\ ((\ {\\bf B},\ {\\bf D},\ {\\bf G},\ {\\bf J}),

(\\mathbf{c},\\mathbf{F})

* * *

simulated spatial statistics (D,G,J and E,H,K) clearly and
consistently overestimate experimental spatial statistics (compare
with Figure 5, same panels, for the exponential kernel with
external infection). See Text S1 for more details.
(TIF)

\_{\\mathbf{(D,G}\_mathbf J}\

(TIF)

Figure S8 Temporal pattern of secondary rates in sites
D1 and D2: Effect of shift. Joint posterior distributions for the
D
transmission rate, bt(model Ma T, DT = 1 month) for sites D1 and
D2 (cf. Figure 4B), plotted with no artificial shift in time (A) and
with a 1-month shift in the rates for site D2 (B, same as Figure 4B
and reproduced here for comparison). While the joint densities in
A lack a clear correlation pattern, consistency for the two sites
emerges in B upon introducing a 1-month lag for the parameters
of D2.
(TIF)

\\beta\_{t}

\\mathcal{M}\_{\\mathfrak{A}}^{\\Delta T},\\varDelta T=1

(TIF)

Figure S9 Consistency of longer-term secondary rates
amongst sites: 6-month resolution. Joint posterior distribu-
D
tions for the transmission rate, bt(model Ma T, DT = 6 months; cf.
Figure 4 and Figure S8 for DT = 1 month) for sites B1 and B2 (A),
sites D1 and D2 plotted with no artificial shift in time (B), and sites
D1 and D2 with a 1-month shift in the rates for site D2 (C). Here,
using a lower time resolution for rates, the consistency in the pattern
of btamong census sites emerges with more regularity, although the
qualitative behaviour is the same as in Figure 4 and Figure S8.
(TIF)

\\bar{\\mathcal{M}}\_{\\upalpha}^{\\Delta T},\\bar{\\varDelta T}=6

\\beta\_{t}

{T T\ =1}

\\mathcal{M}\_{a}^{\\Delta T}

\\beta\_{t}

Figure S10 Estimated distribution of citrus trees in the
area of the experiment. (Figure courtesy of W. Luo.) Area of
the Broward County and the Miami Date County surrounding the
four census sites (delimited by blue lines, cf. Figure 1A). For each
polygon (small sub-areas delimited by gray lines), the human
population density and number of households is known from
census data. The estimated density of residential citrus trees
(colour-coded) was found using an empirical relationship between
the number of citrus trees per household and human population
density (W. Luo and T. Gottwald, private communication). The
estimate shows that the host population was distributed with high

spatial heterogeneity around every census site. Moreover, new
infections were found in the area, and outside census sites, during
all the epidemic (see Methods), which motivates the use of a
primary infection rate e in the model (Equation (2b)).
(TIF)

Table S1 Results of DIC tests. For each census site, DIC
values are calculated for model E (exponential kernel and external
infection) and model C (Cauchy kernel and external infection),
with time-dependent infection rates changing by six-month
D
intervals (model Ma Twith DT = 6 months, cf. Figures 3B–E
D
and Table 1) and by one-month intervals (model Ma Twith
DT = 1 month, cf. Figures 3F–I and Table 1). Pairwise differences
between DIC values for E and C models (columns with header E–
C) show that the two models are essentially equivalent, with a
trend for E to perform better than C as the frequency of rate
change increases. Only for census site D1 is model E clearly
favoured. See Text S1 for more details.
(PDF)

01. Morens DM, Folkers GK, Fauci AS (2004) The challenge of emerging and re-12. Gilligan CA (2008) Sustainable agriculture and plant diseases: an epidemiologemerging infectious diseases. Nature 430: 242–249. ical perspective. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363: 741–759.
02. Ferguson NM, Cummings DAT, Cauchemez S, Fraser C, Riley S, et al. (2005) 13. Bove´ JM (2006) Huanglongbing: a destructive, newly-emerging, century-old
    Strategies for containing an emerging influenza pandemic in Southeast Asia. disease of citrus. J Plant Pathol 88: 7–37.
    Nature 437: 209–214. 14. Gottwald TR (2010) Current Epidemiological Understanding of Citrus
03. Fraser C, Donnelly CA, Cauchemez S, Hanage WP, Van Kerkhove MD, et al. Huanglongbing. Annu Rev Phytopathol 48: 119–139.
    (2009) Pandemic potential of a strain of influenza A (H1N1): early findings. 15. Daszak P, Cunningham AA, Hyatt AD (2000) Emerging infectious diseases of
    Science 324: 1557–1561. wildlife–threats to biodiversity and human health. Science 287: 443–449.
04. Guzman MG, Halstead SB, Artsob H, Buchy P, Farrar J, et al. (2010) Dengue: a 16. Hudson PJ, Rizzoli AP, Grenfell BT, Heesterbeek JAP, Dobson AP (2002)
    continuing global threat. Nat Rev Microbiol 8: S7–S16. Ecology of wildlife diseases. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
05. Solomon T, Lewthwaite P, Perera D, Cardosa MJ, McMinn P, et al. (2010) 17. Fisher MC, Henk DA, Briggs CJ, Brownstein JS, Madoff LC, et al. (2012) Emerging
    Virology, epidemiology, pathogenesis, and control of enterovirus 71. Lancet fungal threats to animal, plant and ecosystem health. Nature 484: 186–194.
    Infect Dis 10: 778–790. 18. Burdon JJ, Thrall PH, Ericson, Lars (2006) The current and future dynamics of
06. Cauchemez S, Van Kerkhove MD, Riley S, Donnelly C, Fraser C, et al. (2013) disease in plant communities. Annu Rev Phytopathol 44: 19–39.
    Transmission scenarios for Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 19. Timmermann V, Børja I, Hietala AM, Kirisits T, Solheim H (2011) Ash
    (MERS-CoV) and how to tell them apart. Euro Surveill 18: pii = 20503. dieback: pathogen spread and diurnal patterns of ascospore dispersal, with
07. Ferguson NM, Donnelly CA, Anderson RM (2001) The foot-and-mouth special emphasis on Norway. EPPO Bulletin 41: 14–20.
    epidemic in Great Britain: pattern of spread and impact of interventions. Science 20. Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs (2013) Chalara
    292: 1155–1160. Management Plan. London: Crown. pp. 34. Available: [https://www.gov.uk/](https://www.gov.uk/)
08. Ferguson NM, Donnelly CA, Anderson RM (2001) Transmission intensity and government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment\_data/file/221051/pb13936-
    impact of control policies on the foot and mouth epidemic in Great Britain. chalara-management-plan-201303.pdf. Accessed 1 April 2014.
    Nature 413: 542–548. 21. Filipe JAN, Cobb RC, Meentemeyer RK, Lee CA, Valachovic YS, et al. (2012)
09. Keeling MJ, Woolhouse MEJ, Shaw DJ, Matthews L, Chase-Topping M, et al. Landscape epidemiology and control of pathogens with cryptic and long-
    (2001) Dynamics of the 2001 UK foot and mouth epidemic: stochastic dispersal distance dispersal: sudden oak death in northern Californian forests. PLoS
    in a heterogeneous landscape. Science 294: 813–817. Comput Biol 8: e1002328.
10. Thompson D, Muriel P, Russell D, Osborne P, Bromley A, et al. (2002) 22. Donaldson AI, Gloster J, Harvey LD, Deans DH (1982) Use of prediction models
    Economic costs of the foot and mouth disease outbreak in the United Kingdom to forecast and analyse airborne spread during the foot-and-mouth disease
    in 2001. Rev Sci Tech Off Int Epizoot 21: 675–685. outbreaks in Brittany, Jersey and the Isle of Wight in 1981. Vet Rec 110: 53–57.
11. Donnelly CA, Woodroffe R, Cox DR, Bourne FJ, Cheeseman CL, et al. (2005) 23. Gibbens JC, Wilesmith JW, Sharpe CE, Mansley LM, Michalopoulou E, et al.
    Positive and negative effects of widespread badger culling on tuberculosis in (2001) Descriptive epidemiology of the 2001 foot-and-mouth disease epidemic in
    cattle. Nature 439: 843–846. Great Britain: the first five months. Vet Rec 149: 729–743.

d T!=!6

Text S1 Dispersal kernels and spatial goodness-of-fit
tests: Definitions, basic theory and discussion of further
results (including selected supplementary figures).
(PDF)

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Professor Steve Brooks, Statistical Laboratory,
Cambridge, for initial discussions in MCMC estimation, to Lara Jamieson
who carried out some exploratory analyses, and to Joa˜o Filipe for fruitful
discussions on dispersal kernels. We thank Weiqui Luo for providing the
map in Figure 1A and for producing Figure S10. FMN acknowledges the
use of computing facilities provided by CamGrid.

{T\ !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!\

Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: FMN ARC GJG TRG CAG.
Performed the experiments: FMN ARC TRG. Analyzed the data: FMN
ARC CAG. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: GJG TRG.
Wrote the paper: FMN ARC GJG TRG CAG.

* * *

24. Hugh-Jones ME, Wright PB (1970) Studies on the 1967–8 foot-and-mouth
    disease epidemic. Journal of Hygiene, Cambridge 68: 253–271.
25. Kao RR (2002) The role of mathematical modelling in the control of the 2001
    FMD epidemic in the UK. Trends Microbiol 10: 279–286.
26. Girard MP, Tam JS, Assossou OM, Kieny MP (2010) The 2009 A (H1N1)
    influenza virus pandemic: A review. Vaccine 28: 4895–4902.
27. Roberts MJ, Schimmelpfennig DE, Ashley E, Livingston MJ, Ash M, et al.
    (2006) The value of plant disease early-warning systems: a case study of USDA’s
    soybean rust coordinated framework. United States Department of Agriculture,
    Economic Research Service. Available: [http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/](http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/)
    err-economic-research-report/err18.aspx#.UzrxL6Jc90s. Accessed 1 April
29. Gottwald TR, Sun X, Riley T, Graham JH, Ferrandino F, et al. (2002) Georeferenced spatiotemporal analysis of the urban citrus canker epidemic in
    Florida. Phytopathology 92: 361–377.
30. Gottwald TR, Graham JH, Schubert TS (2002) Citrus canker: the pathogen and
    its impact. Plant Health Progress 10. doi:10.1094/PHP-2002-0812-01-RV
31. Bock CH, Parker PE, Gottwald TR (2005) Effect of simulated wind-driven rain
    on duration and distance of dispersal of Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri from
    canker-infected citrus trees. Plant Dis 89: 71–80.
32. Gottwald TR, Hughes G, Graham JH, Sun X, Riley T (2001) The citrus canker
    epidemic in Florida: The scientific basis of regulatory eradication policy for an
    invasive species. Phytopathology 91: 30–34.
33. Gottwald TR, Irey M (2007) Post-hurricane analysis of citrus canker II:
    Predictive model estimation of disease spread and area potentially impacted by
    various eradication protocols following catastrophic weather events. Plant
    Health Progress. doi:10.1094/PHP-2007-0405-01-RS.
34. Mollison D (1977) Spatial contact models for ecological and epidemic spread.
    J R Statist Soc B 39: 283–232.
35. Gibson GJ, Renshaw E (1998) Estimating parameters in stochastic compartmental models using Markov chain methods. IMA J Math Appl Med 15: 19–40.
36. O’Neill PD, Roberts GO (1999) Bayesian inference for partially observed
    stochastic epidemics. J R Stat Soc Ser A Stat Soc 162: 121–129.
37. Chis Ster I, Singh BK, Ferguson NM (2009) Epidemiological inference for
    partially observed epidemics: the example of the 2001 foot and mouth epidemic
    in Great Britain. Epidemics 1: 21–34.
38. Jewell CP, Kypraios T, Neal P, Roberts GO (2009) Bayesian analysis for
    emerging infectious diseases. Bayesian Analysis 4: 465–496.
39. Cauchemez S, Bhattarai A, Marchbanks TL, Fagan RP, Ostroff S, et al. (2011)
    Role of social networks in shaping disease transmission during a community
    outbreak of 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:
    2825–2830.
40. Gilks WR, Spiegelhalter SRD (1996) Markov Chain Monte Carlo in Practice.
    First edition. London: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
41. Spiegelhalter DJ, Best NG, Carlin BP, Van Der Linde A (2002) Bayesian
    measures of model complexity and fit. J R Stat Soc Ser B Stat Methodol 64:
    583–639.
42. Celeux G, Forbes F, Robert CP, Titterington DM (2006) Deviance information
    criteria for missing data models. Bayesian Analysis 1: 651–673.
43. Cook A, Marion G, Butler A, Gibson G (2007) Bayesian inference for the spatiotemporal invasion of alien species. Bull Math Biol 69: 2005–2025.
44. Gelman A, Carlin JB, Stern HS, Rubin DB (2003) Bayesian Data Analysis.
    London: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
45. Filipe JAN, Maule MM (2004) Effects of dispersal mechanisms on spatiotemporal development of epidemics. J Theor Biol 226: 125–141.
46. Bjørnstad ON, Falck W (2001) Nonparametric spatial covariance functions:
    estimation and testing. Environ Ecol Stat 8: 53–70.
47. Cuzick J, Edwards R (1990) Spatial Clustering for Inhomogeneous Populations.
    Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological): 73–104.
48. Keeling MJ, Brooks SP, Gilligan CA (2004) Using conservation of pattern to
    estimate spatial parameters from a single snapshot. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
    101: 9155–9160.

Bayesian Analysis of an Emerging Epidemic
48\. Gibson GJ, Otten W, Filipe JAN, Cook AR, Marion G, et al. (2006) Bayesian
estimation for percolation models of disease spread in plant populations. Stat
Comput 16: 391–402.
49\. Cook AR, Otten W, Marion G, Gibson GJ, Gilligan CA (2007) Estimation of
multiple transmission rates for epidemics in heterogeneous populations. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 104: 20392–20397.
50\. Gibson GJ (1997) Investigating mechanisms of spatiotemporal epidemic spread
using stochastic models. Phytopathology 87: 139–146.
51\. Gibson GJ, Austin EJ (1996) Fitting and testing spatio-temporal stochastic
models with application in plant epidemiology. Plant Pathology 45: 172–184.
52\. Meentemeyer RK, Cunniffe NJ, Cook AR, Filipe JAN, Hunter RD, et al. (2011)
Epidemiological modeling of invasion in heterogeneous landscapes: spread of
sudden oak death in California (1990–2030). Ecosphere 2: art17.
53\. Gottwald TR, Bassanezi RB, Amorim L, Bergamin-Filho A (2007) Spatial
pattern analysis of citrus canker-infected plantings in Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil, and
augmentation of infection elicited by the Asian leafminer. Phytopathology 97:
674–683.
54\. Gilligan CA, Truscott JE, Stacey AJ (2007) Impact of scale on the effectiveness of
disease control strategies for epidemics with cryptic infection in a dynamical
landscape: an example for a crop disease. J R Soc Interface 4: 925–934.
55\. Savill NJ, Shaw DJ, Deardon R, Tildesley MJ, Keeling MJ, et al. (2007) Effect of
data quality on estimates of farm infectiousness trends in the UK 2001 foot-andmouth disease epidemic. J R Soc Interface 4: 235–241.
56\. Parnell S, Gottwald TR, Gilligan CA, Cunniffe NJ, Van Den Bosch F (2010)
The effect of landscape pattern on the optimal eradication zone of an invading
epidemic. Phytopathology 100: 638–644.
57\. Cintineo RM, Stensrud DJ (2013) On the Predictability of Supercell
Thunderstorm Evolution. J Atmos Sci 70: 1993–2011.
58\. Magarey RD, Fowler GA, Borchert DM, Sutton TB, Colunga-Garcia M, et al.
(2007) NAPPFAST: an internet system for the weather-based mapping of plant
pathogens. Plant Dis 91: 336–345.
59\. Shaman J, Kohn M (2009) Absolute humidity modulates influenza survival,
transmission, and seasonality. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106: 3243–3248.
60\. Shaman J, Karspeck A (2012) Forecasting seasonal outbreaks of influenza. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 109: 20425–20430.
61\. Gubler DJ, Reiter P, Ebi KL, Yap W, Nasci R, et al. (2001) Climate variability
and change in the United States: potential impacts on vector-and rodent-borne
diseases. Environ Health Perspect 109: 223.
62\. Hay SI, Cox J, Rogers DJ, Randolph SE, Stern DI, et al. (2002) Climate change
and the resurgence of malaria in the East African highlands. Nature 415: 905–
909.
63\. Hunter PR (2003) Climate change and waterborne and vector-borne disease.
J Appl Microbiol 94: 37–46.
64\. Lafferty KD (2009) The ecology of climate change and infectious diseases.
Ecology 90: 888–900.
65\. Gould EA, Higgs S (2009) Impact of climate change and other factors on
emerging arbovirus diseases. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 103: 109–121.
66\. Tabachnick WJ (2010) Challenges in predicting climate and environmental
effects on vector-borne disease episystems in a changing world. The Journal of
Experimental Biology 213: 946–954.
67\. Linthicum KJ, Anyamba A, Tucker CJ, Kelley PW, Myers MF, et al. (1999)
Climate and satellite indicators to forecast Rift Valley fever epidemics in Kenya.
Science 285: 397–400.
68\. Shaman J, Day JF, Stieglitz M (2002) Drought-induced amplification of Saint
Louis encephalitis virus, Florida. Emerg Infect Dis 8: 575–580.
69\. Shaman J, Day JF, Stieglitz M (2005) Drought-induced amplification and
epidemic transmission of West Nile virus in southern Florida. J Med Entomol 42:
134–141.
70\. Relman DA, Hamburg MA, Choffnes ER, Mack A (2008) Global climate
change and extreme weather events: Understanding the contributions to
infectious disease emergence: Workshop summary. Washington, D.C.: National
Academies Press.