Prioritizing Risks and Uncertainties from Intentional
Release of Selected Category A Pathogens

Tao Hong1\*, Patrick L. Gurian2, Yin Huang3, Charles N. Haas2

1 National Exposure Research Laboratory, Environmental Protection Agency, Athens, Georgia, United States of America, 2 Department of Civil, Architectural, and
Environmental Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America, 3 Office of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Food and Drug
Administration, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America

Abstract

This paper synthesizes available information on five Category A pathogens (Bacillus anthracis, Yersinia pestis, Francisella
tularensis, Variola major and Lassa) to develop quantitative guidelines for how environmental pathogen concentrations may
be related to human health risk in an indoor environment. An integrated model of environmental transport and human
health exposure to biological pathogens is constructed which 1) includes the effects of environmental attenuation, 2)
considers fomite contact exposure as well as inhalational exposure, and 3) includes an uncertainty analysis to identify key
input uncertainties, which may inform future research directions. The findings provide a framework for developing the
many different environmental standards that are needed for making risk-informed response decisions, such as when
prophylactic antibiotics should be distributed, and whether or not a contaminated area should be cleaned up. The approach
is based on the assumption of uniform mixing in environmental compartments and is thus applicable to areas sufficiently
removed in time and space from the initial release that mixing has produced relatively uniform concentrations. Results
indicate that when pathogens are released into the air, risk from inhalation is the main component of the overall risk, while
risk from ingestion (dermal contact for B. anthracis) is the main component of the overall risk when pathogens are present
on surfaces. Concentrations sampled from untracked floor, walls and the filter of heating ventilation and air conditioning
(HVAC) system are proposed as indicators of previous exposure risk, while samples taken from touched surfaces are
proposed as indicators of future risk if the building is reoccupied. A Monte Carlo uncertainty analysis is conducted and
input-output correlations used to identify important parameter uncertainties. An approach is proposed for integrating these
quantitative assessments of parameter uncertainty with broader, qualitative considerations to identify future research
priorities.

Citation: Hong T, Gurian PL, Huang Y, Haas CN (2012) Prioritizing Risks and Uncertainties from Intentional Release of Selected Category A Pathogens. PLoS
ONE 7(3): e32732. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732

Editor: Daniel G. Bausch, Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, United States of America

decontamination standards for bioterrorism agents \[8\].
As a result, research has been undertaken to better understand
the risks resulting from a bioterrorist attack. Sextro et al. modeled

Received May 23, 2011; Accepted February 2, 2012; Published March 6, 2012

\ {P},

Funding: This research was funded through the Center for Advancing Microbial Risk Assessment, supported by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and United States Department of Homeland Security, under the Science to Achieve Results (STAR) grant program (grant number:R83236201). The funders
had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Biological weapons, also known as вҖҳвҖҳthe poor manвҖҷs atom bombвҖҷвҖҷ,
have been included in terroristsвҖҷ arsenal because of their capability
of producing mass causalities combined with natural access to the
pathogens, manageable technical challenges and relatively low costs
to launch an attack \[1,2,3\]. Prior to the 2001 anthrax letter attacks,
identified bioterrorism attacks included the release of Salmonella
typhimurium to eleven restaurant salad bars in the city of Portland in
1984 to influence an election, which caused the infection of 750
people, and the release of B. anthracis spores in Tokyo by the
religious group Aum Shinrikyo between 1990 and 1995, which
failed to infect any people \[4,5\]. The 2001 anthrax letter attacks
infected 22 people (11 inhalational cases and 11 cutaneous cases
\[6\]), caused the deaths of 5 people, and cost hundreds of millions of
dollars in clean up costs \[7\]. The attacks revealed that the U.S.
lacked the guidelines for a quick response to such attacks, as well as
decontamination standards for bioterrorism agents \[8\].
As a result, research has been undertaken to better understand

Introduction

the spread of B. anthracis spores in a hypothetical office suite,
estimated occupantsвҖҷ exposure, and found that activity-related
resuspension was an important source of human exposure \[9\]. This
model did not consider environmental decay of the pathogen. While
B. anthracis is a persistent pathogen whose environmental decay rate
can be treated as zero for a short time simulation \[10\], Sextro et al.вҖҷs
model would need to be modified to include environmental
attenuation in order to be used to estimate the fate and transport
of non-persistent biological agents. Price et al. \[11\] created a
framework to link the degree of contamination in a building to the
risk to the occupants, which could also be used to establish a
decontamination standard if an acceptable risk level is provided. In
addition, Price et al. linked the number of negative samples to the
level of statistical confidence in the determination that the building
had been effectively decontaminated \[11\]. However, this study did
not provide a mechanistic model to describe the long term fate and
transport and overall mass balance of the released pathogens,
instead using a proportionality relationship to link the short term
surface concentration of deposited pathogens to the short term
concentration of aerosolized ones. Hong et al. \[12\] modeled the distribution of both air and surface-released B. anthracis spores in an
office, and used concentrations found in different environmental
media (i.e., surface, wall, ventilation filter, etc.) to infer future or past
aerosol exposure. At the same time, they applied probability
sampling theory in determining the minimum sampling area
corresponding to certain levels of confidence in meeting allowable
residual risk targets. The variability during sampling recovery and
the potential for clumping of B. anthracis were taken into account.
Besides not including pathogen decay, the above-mentioned studies
quantify only inhalational risk, and omit threats from ingestion and
dermal contact.
While models for B. anthracis have focused on a single pathway,

dermal contact.
While models for B. anthracis have focused on a single pathway,
inhalation exposure, mathematical models have been developed for
influenza that take multiple disease transmission routes, such as
inhalation and ingestion, into account \[13,14,15\]. Nicas and Gang
introduced a Markov chain model to quantify multiple-pathway
exposure to influenza for a health-care worker who had close contact
with a patient \[16\]. Three exposure routes were concerned, handmucous membranes, inhalation, and direct projection of pathogencontaining droplets onto mucous membranes. In a subsequent study,
Nicas et al. applied their model to quantify the relative importance of
different influenza virus exposure pathways, and pointed out that
model uncertainties had significant impacts on the conclusion as to
which pathway is dominant \[17\]. Atkinson and Wein constructed a
four-person household transmission model to quantify the dominant
transmission route for pandemic influenza \[14,15\]. Both of the
studies performed analysis on the recognized major transmission
pathways: droplet, airborne, and contacts \[18,19\]. However, the
above-mentioned studies adopted fixed parameter values in the
computations instead of distributions across possible values, which
does not account for variability and uncertainty. There is evidence
that including uncertainty and variability is important \[20,21\].
Smieszek compared predictions from a mechanistic exposure model
and empirical data from a contact diary study to analyze the impacts
of different contact intensities and durations. Results showed that
treating all the contacts equally overestimated the expected number
of infected individuals \[20\]. A study by Julian et al. used Monte Carlo
simulation to analyze variability and uncertainty in the risk due to
nondietary ingestion of rotavirus, relying on a micro-level activity
time series \[21\], which may inspire future high-resolution microbial
risk assessment \[22\].
These multiple pathway models have been applied to common

B. anthracis is a Gram-positive, facultatively anaerobic, rod-shaped
bacterium of the genus Bacillus. It is the causative agent of anthrax,
an acute disease in humans and animals, which is highly lethal in
some forms. B. anthracis is one of only a few bacteria that can form
long-lived spores. Y. pestis, the causative agent of plague, is a Gramnegative facultative anaerobic bipolar-staining bacillus bacterium
belonging to the family Enterobacteriaceae. Plague may be manifested
in one of three forms: bubonic, pneumonic, and septicemic plague
\[23\]. Francisella tularensis is a pathogenic species of Gram-negative
bacteria that causes the zoonotic disease tularemia. F. tularensis is
reported to be one of most infectious organisms known. It is an
intracellular pathogen, replicating mainly in macrophages, and has

also been reported in amoebae \[24\]. Variola major is the causative
agent of smallpox. There has been no effective treatment developed
for this disease, which has an average 30% mortality rate. Lassa
virus, the causative agent of one type of hemorrhagic fever, infects
more than 200,000 people per year causing more than 3,000 deaths
with a mortality rate of about 15% among the hospitalized cases
\[25\]. The selected Category A pathogens represent a range of
environmental persistencies from a pathogen with a very low decay
rate (B.anthracis), to several with high decay rates (Y.Pestis, F. tularensis,
and Lassa), as well as one with a moderate decay rate (Variola major).
The objective of this study is to expand the framework that

and Lassa), as well as one with a moderate decay rate (Variola major).
The objective of this study is to expand the framework that
Hong et al. \[12\] developed for linking environmental concentrations of B. anthracis with human health risk by 1) including the
effects of environmental attenuation, 2) considering a variety of
different pathogens instead of a single one (B. anthracis), 3) taking
account of contact exposure (ingestion or dermal risk) as well as
inhalational exposure, and 4) conducting an uncertainty analysis
and identifying key input uncertainties. Both detailed and reduced
form solutions to the equations linking risk to environmental
concentrations are developed, which could benefit in making riskinformed response decisions, such as determining when prophylactic antibiotics should be distributed, and whether or not a
contaminated area should be cleaned up. Monte Carlo methods
are used to assess uncertainty in the results and identify important
uncertainties in input parameters so that future research may be
directed towards reducing them.

2.1 Fate and transport model
In this study, an occupant is modeled as continuously present in

Methods

2.1 Fate and transport model
In this study, an occupant is modeled as continuously present in
a one-room office with a heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) system (Figure 1). This person has the chance of inhaling
aerosolized pathogens and ingesting pathogens deposited on the
touched surfaces through the surface-hand-mouth transmission
route. For B. anthracis, the ingestion risk is replaced by cutaneous
risk since this was a more important exposure route than ingestion
in the 2001 anthrax letter attacks \[6\]. The room is modeled as a set
of completely mixed compartments. This assumption fails to
capture localized areas of high risks, such as a high concentrated
puff of pathogens right after the initial release. Thus, the approach
developed here is more appropriate for situations somewhat
removed in time and space from the initial release, where mixing
has occurred and concentrations are relatively uniform.
The governing equation for the fate and transport of released

Г°1Гһ

The governing equation for the fate and transport of released
pathogens is presented in Equation 1:

\\frac{d\\overrightarrow{M(t)}}{d t}=\\overrightarrow{K}\\overrightarrow{M(t)}

The general solution to Equation 1 is expressed as:

!!
where N and L contain the eigenvalues and eigenvectors after
!
eigendecompositing the transfer matrix K based on Equation 3 \[26\]:

(\\overrightarrow{M(0)})

\\vec{N}

* * *

Prioritizing Risks of Category A Pathogens

Figure 1. Schematic of model. (HVAC stands for heating ventilation and air conditioning. a. cross section view, b. plan view).

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.g001

PLoS ONE \| [www.plosone.org](http://www.plosone.org/) March 2012 \| Volume 7 \| Issue 3 \| e32732

* * *

\\overrightarrow{K}=\\overrightarrow{L}\\overrightarrow{N}\\overrightarrow{L}^{T}

Г°3Гһ

!
For the fate and transport model used in this paper, M(t) is a
vector representing the numbers of pathogens in each of 10
modeled states with subscripts: 1) air (indoor air, Mair), 2) ts
(horizontal touchable surfaces from which spores may be

\\overrightarrow{M(t)}

\\mathrm{M\_{t f}},,4

transferred to human hands, Mts), 3) tf (tracked floor from which
spores may be re-suspended by walking or other activities, Mtf), 4)
utf (untracked floor from which there is no re-suspension, Mutf), 5)
w (walls, Mw), 6) f (HVAC filter, Mf), 7) n (the nasal passages, Mn),
8) h (hands of an occupant of the office, Mh), 9) ec (all areas
external to the room, Mec), and 10) d (decayed pathogens,Md).
Thus Equation 1 can be detailed written as:

\\mathrm{M\_{a i r}),\ 2)}

\\mathrm{M}{}\_{\\mathrm{t s}},,)\

\\mathrm{M\_{u\\mathrm{f f}}),5)}

\\mathrm{M\_{f}},7)

\\mathrm{M\_{n}).}

\\mathrm{M}\_{\\mathrm{w}}),6,

\ {mathrm M\_{d}}}

\\mathbf{M}\_{\\mathrm{e c}}).

\\left\[\\begin{array}{c c c c c c c}{{\\vec{M} _{u}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{u}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{u}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{u}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{u}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M} _{v}}}\ {{\\vec{M}_{v}}}\ {\
\
Г°4Гһ\
\
where\
\
The solution to this set of ordinary differential equations gives\
the concentration of pathogens in the 10 different compartments\
as a function of time. Because the system is linear, masses in\
different compartments will be proportional to the release\
quantity. Thus, solving the system gives the constant of\
proportionality so that measured surface concentrations can be\
related to release quantity and risk to occupants. In Equation 4,\
the deposition from the air compartment to compartment i is\
\
modeled as a first-order process with rate constants of li(with i\
values as described above). A second source of removal is by the\
HVAC system. The total air flow rate through the HVAC system\
3\
is denoted by Q (units of m /s), p (dimensionless) is the fraction of\
total air flow that is recirculated into the building by the HVAC\
system, ef(dimensionless) is the efficiency of the filter at removing\
particles, and V is the volume of the room (m3). Removal to the\
occupantsвҖҷ nasal passages is also modeled with Inh (m3/s),\
denoting the breathing flow rate, and en(dimensionless), the\
efficiency of the nasal passages at removing particles. Removal by\
losing viability in each compartment is modeled as a first order\
rate with separate decay rates, ci. However, due to limited data,\
only two types of decay values are available (Table 1), 1) the air\
decay rate (cair), which is used for the air and external\
compartments, and 2) the fomite decay rate (cfomite), which is\
\
\\lambda\_{\\mathrm{i}}\
\
\\mathrm{m^{3}/s})\
\
\\left\\mathrm\\mathrm{m}^{3}\\right)\
\
\ \ gamma{}\_{\\mathrm{a i r}}\
\
\\mathrm{e\_\_{f}}\
\
\\mathrm{(m^{3}/s).}\
\
| Pathogen | Averaged decay rate in the air ($\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{air}}$) ($\\mathrm{hr}^{-1}$) | Range of decay rate in the air ($\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{air}}$) ($\\mathrm{hr}^{-1}$)$^{\\mathrm{a}}$ | Condition | Source | Averaged decay rate on fomite ($\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{fomite}}$) ($\\mathrm{hr}^{-1}$) | Range of decay rate on the fomite ($\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{fomite}}$) ($\\mathrm{hr}^{-1}$)$^{\\mathrm{a}}$ | Condition | Source |  |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| B. anthracis | $8.16\\times 10^{-5}$ | $(1.11\\times 10^{-5},1.97\\times 10^{-4})$ | NA | \[43,44\] | $3.36\\times 10^{-5}$ | $(1.92\\times 10^{-5},4.64\\times 10^{-5})$ | NA | \[43,45,46,47\] |  |\
| Y. pestis | 2.75 | (2.10,3.49) | T=26в„ғпјҢrH=20-87% | \[48\] | $4.55\\times 10^{-1}$ | (0.04,1.24) | T=11-22в„ғпјҢrH=30-55% metalпјҢsteelпјҢзҺ»з’ғпјҢзәёе’ҢPolyethylene | \[49,50\] |  |\
| F. tularensis | 3.27 | (0.55,9.20) | T=20-40в„ғпјҢrH=85% | \[51,52,53\] | $2.39\\times 10^{-1}$ | (0.01,0.46) | T=25-37в„ғпјҢrH=10-100% on metal | \[50\] |  |\
| Variola major | $4.55\\times 10^{-2}$ | $(1.00\\times 10^{-2},1.30\\times 10^{-1})$ | T=10-34в„ғпјҢrH=20-80% | \[54,55\] | $6.89\\times 10^{-3}$ | $(5.45\\times 10^{-3},9.95\\times 10^{-3})$ | T=25-37в„ғпјҢrH=3-96% on glass | \[56\] |  |\
| Lassa | 2.6 | (0.78,4.14) | T=24-28в„ғпјҢrH=30-80% | \[57\] | $7.67\\times 10^{-1b}$ | (0.68,0.92) | T=20в„ғпјҢrH=NA on aluminum | \[58\] |  |\
\
(\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{a i r}})\
\
\ !!=!26^{\\circ}\\mathsf{C},\
\
3.36\\times10^{-5}\
\
T=11-22^{\\circ}C,H1=330-550%449.50\
\
4.55!{\\times}!10^{-1}\
\
\\left(\\mathcal{Y}\_{\\mathrm{f o m i t e}}\\right)\
\
\[51.\\underset{}55\ 53\]\ \ 2.39\\times\\underset{}{10^{-1}}\
\
7=10-34^{\\circ}C\
\
1.30\\times{10}^{-1})\
\
\\mathsf{r{H}}!=!20!-!80%\
\
(5.45{!\\times}10^{-3},9.95{\\times}10^{-3})\
\
7=24-28^{\\circ}C,\
\
T=25-37^{\\circ}C,n H=3-960\ \[56\]\
\
a\
Uniform distribution is assumed between the maximum and minimum values.\
b\
Due to the lack of information on Lassa, the average of the decay rates of Bunyaviridae hantavirus, Sicilian virus Sabin, and Crimean-Congp on fomites are used for used for the loss of viability in other media. Resuspension from the\
tracked floor due to occupants walking and other activities is also\
modeled as a first order process with rate constant m (units of s21).\
The interactions between human and fomites are represented by\
hand-surface (rhs) and surface- hand (rsh) contact rates, as well as\
mass transfer fractions between hand to surface (fhs), surface to\
hand (fsh), and hand to mouth (fhm).\
The deposition rates can be expressed in terms of parameters\
\
\\upmu\
\
s^{-1}\
\
\\left(\\mathrm{r}\_{\\mathrm{s h}}\\right)\
\
Г°10Гһ\
\
(mathrm f{}\_{\\mathrm{h s}}),\
\
\\left(\\mathrm{r}\_{\\mathrm{h s}}\\right)\
\
\\left\ \\mathrm{f}{}\_{\\mathrm{s h}}\\right)\
\
\ \\mathrm({f}\_{\\mathrm{h m}})\
\
sh hm\
The deposition rates can be expressed in terms of parameters\
representing the indoor air flow conditions \[27,28,29\]:\
\
\\lambda\_{t f(u t f)}=\\frac{A\_{t f(u t f)}}{V}\\times\\frac{\\nu}{1-e^{-\\frac{\\pi\\nu}{2\\sqrt{D\_{d i f}k\_{e}}}}}\
\
Г°6Гһ\
\
{{\\mathfrak{}}},\
\
\\lambda\_{w}=\\frac{A\_{w}}{V}\\times\\frac{2}{\\pi}\\sqrt{D\_{d\\mathit{f f}}k\_{e}}\
\
Г°7Гһ\
\
\\nu!=\\frac\ g{{d\_{d i a}}^{2}(\\rho\_{p}!-!\\rho\_{a i r})}{18\\mu\_{a i r}}\
\
Г°8Гһ\
\
where Atf(utf)is the surface area of the tracked or untracked floor,\
Awis the surface area of the walls, Ddifis the particleвҖҷs diffusivity,\
keis turbulence intensity, v is particle settling velocity, which is\
given in Equation 8 as a function of the gravitational constant (g),\
the particleвҖҷs diameter (ddia), the viscosity of air (mair), the density of\
the particle (rp), and the density of air (rair).\
\
\\mathrm{A\_{w}}\
\
\\mathrm{A\_{t f(u t f)}}\
\
\\mathrm{D\_{\\mathrm{d i f}}}\
\
\\mathrm{k\_{e}}\
\
\\mathrm{{(d\_{d i a})}}\
\
(\\upmu\_{\\mathrm{a i r}})\
\
(\\mathsf{p}\_{\\mathrm{p}})\
\
\\left(\\mathfrak{p}\_{\\mathrm{a i r}}\\right)\
\
2.2 Release scenarios\
Two pathogen release\
\
Two pathogen release scenarios are considered. In the first\
scenario, pathogens are released to the air compartment. The\
occupant directly inhales aerosolized pathogens and ingests the\
deposited ones via surface-hand-mouth contacts. Environmental\
\
concentrations measured at the end of the exposure period are used\
to characterize the risk from the past aerosol release, and as such it is\
termed the retrospective scenario. In the second scenario, pathogens\
are initially present on the touched surfaces, where they may be\
ingested by surface-hand-mouth\
caused resuspension introduces the pathogens into the air where\
they can be inhaled by the occupant. Environmental concentrations\
at the beginning of the exposure period are used to predict the\
future risk and as such the scenario\
scenario. This scenario addresses the residual risk present after\
aerosolized particles have had\
surfaces, a key issue in establishing a decontamination standard.\
The exposure dose (d) is composed of two sources: inhalation\
\
concentrations measured at the end of the exposure period are used\
to characterize the risk from the past aerosol release, and as such it is\
termed the retrospective scenario. In the second scenario, pathogens\
are initially present on the touched surfaces, where they may be\
surface-hand-mouth contacts. In addition, humancaused resuspension introduces the pathogens into the air where\
they can be inhaled by the occupant. Environmental concentrations\
at the beginning of the exposure period are used to predict the\
scenario is termed the prospective\
scenario. This scenario addresses the residual risk present after\
the opportunity to deposit onto\
surfaces, a key issue in establishing a decontamination standard.\
) is composed of two sources: inhalation\
\
Г°9Гһ\
\
The exposure dose (ddose) is composed of two sources: inhalation\
and ingestion. Based on Equation\
obtained by integrating the\
pathogenвҖҷs air concentration\
duration (the exposure begins at t1\
is introduced at t = 0), and the ingestion dose equals the integral of\
\
) is composed of two sources: inhalation\
Equation 9, the inhalation dose is\
inhalation rate (Inh) and the\
concentration (Cair) over the total exposure\
duration (the exposure begins at t1 and ends at t2, while the agent\
is introduced at t = 0), and the ingestion dose equals the integral of\
\
duration (the exposure begins at t1 and ends at t2, while the agent\
is introduced at t = 0), and the ingestion dose equals the integral of\
the hand-mouth contact rate (rhm), mass transfer fraction from\
hand to month during each contact (fhm), the involved area of a\
\
hand to month during each contact (f\
human hand (Ah), and the pathogenвҖҷs concentration on the hand\
(Ch) over the same exposure period:\
\
hand to month during each contact (fhm), the involved area of a\
), and the pathogenвҖҷs concentration on the hand\
) over the same exposure period:\
\
(Ch) over the same exposure period:\
\
Г°12Гһ\
\
_\\mathrm^{(d_{o s s!)}}\
\
\\left(\\mathrm{A\_{h}}\\right)\
\
\ \_{1}\
\
\ \\left(\\mathbf{r}\_{\\mathrm{h m}}\\right)\
\
d\_{d o s e}!=!I h h\\int\_{t\_{1}}^{t\_{2}}C\_{a i r}(t)d t+r\_{s h}f\_{s h}\\int\_{t\_{1}}^{t\_{2}}C\_{t s}(t)d t\
\
This equation is applied for B. anthracis instead of Equation 9,\
where Ctsis pathogenвҖҷs concentration on the touched surface.\
However, separate dose-response coefficients are used for the\
different exposure pathways for anthrax. The dermal doseresponse parameter is tuned so as to produce equal numbers of\
dermal and inhalation cases for the aerosol release scenario, as was\
observed in the 2001 attacks.\
\
2.3 Dose-response functions\
The exponential (Equation 11) and beta-Poisson (Equation 12)\
\
\\mathrm{C\_{t s}}\
\
The exponential (Equation 11) and beta-Poisson (Equation 12)\
dose-response models, which have been widely used in microbial\
risk assessment \[30\], are used in this study:\
\
P(d\_{d o s e})!=!1!-!e^{-!R\ !d d\_{d o s e}}\
\
(12a)\
\
P(d\_{d o s e})!=!1!--!\\left\[1+\\frac{d\_{d o s e}}{N\_{50}}\\times\\left(2^{\\frac{1}{2}}!-!1\\right)\\right\]^{-x}\
\
In Equations 11 and 12, P(ddose) is the probability of positive\
response (infection, illness, or death) for a population average dose,\
which allows for Poisson variability in individual exposure \[31\]. R\
is the parameter of the exponential dose-response model, N50, and\
a are the parameters of the beta-Poisson model. When the risk is\
relatively small, a first-order Taylor series expansion can be used\
to approximate Equations 11 and 12 as \[12\]:\
\
P(\\mathrm{d}\_{\\mathrm{d o s e}})\
\
\ \\mathbf(\\mathbf{M}{}\_{\\mathbf{h}})\
\
P(d\_{d o s e})!\\approx!R d\_{d o s e}\
\
P(d\_{d o s e})\\approx\\frac\\\ \ \ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\ \\\\
\
C\
A Г°13Гһ\
\
This transformation can simplify the low dose risk estimation,\
which is where this approach is intended for use (i.e., for areas\
removed from the initial release where concentrations will be\
relatively uniform over spatial scales of interest. When the exposure\
dose is high, the full model (Equations 11 and 12) should be used.\
\
2.4.1 Retrospective scenario. Given that it is rarely possible\
to have real-time pathogen air concentrations during a biological\
attack, the objective in the retrospective scenario is to use surface\
samples to infer what exposure and risk resulted from the release.\
Thus, the following discussion develops relationships between\
pathogen concentrations on surfaces and average dose.\
After an aerosol release, the amount of pathogens in the air\
\
whose initial conditions are:\
\
* * *\
\
\\left\[\\begin{array}{c}{M\_{a\\mathit r i}(0)}\ {M\_{\\mathit t s}(0)}\ {M\_{mathit h h}(0)}\\end{array}\\right\]=\\left\[\\begin{array}{c}{M\_{\\mathit a r r}0}\ {0}\ {0}\\end{array}\\right\]\
\
Based on the general solution listed in Equation 2, the solutions\
to Equation 13 are:\
\
Г°17Гһ\
\
M\_{a i r}!=!M\_{a i r0}\\mathsf{e^{-A t}}\
\
Г°14Гһ\
\
\\begin{array}{l}{{\\displaystyle{\\cal M} _{a s=}}}\ {{\\displaystyle\\frac{B{{cal M}}{_{a i0}}}{\\Omega}\\left{\\frac{\\Phi}{e^{A t}}-\\frac{((C{-}F)\\Phi+2B e E)\\sinh{(\\frac{\\Theta}{2}}t)-\\Theta\\Phi c o s h(\\frac{\\Theta}{2}t)}{\\Theta e^{\\frac{C+F}{2}}}\\right}(15)}}\\end{array}\
\
()\
Г°15Гһ\
\
M\_{h}!=!\\frac{B E M\_{a i t0}}{2\\Theta\\Omega}\\left{\\frac{\\Theta!+!\\Psi}{e^{(\\frac{C+F+\\Theta}{2})t}t}-\\frac{\\Theta!-!\\Psi}{e^{(\\frac{C+F-\\Theta}{2})}t}-!\ 2\\Theta e^{-A t}\\right}\
\
Г°16Гһ\
\
B!=!\\lambda\_{t s}\
\
\\scriptstyle{C}\ {,}=\ gamma{{\ } _{t s}},+,r_{s h}{{\ }\_{s h}}\
\
\\scriptstyle{D}=\ r\_{h s}f\_{h s}\
\
E!=!r\_{s h}f\_{s h}\
\
F!=!\\gamma\_{h}!+!r\_{h s}f\_{h s}\
\
\ \_1\
\
\\begin{array}{l l l}{{d odisplaystyle e s\_{t}=}}&{{\\displaystyle d o s e\_{i n h}+d o s e\_{i n g}}}\ {{\ \ }}&{{=displaystyle\\intint\_{{{}} _{t_{1}}}^{t\_{2}}(\\frac{H H H}{V\\rho!M M\_{i r r}}+r\_{h n}f\_{h i}d M} _{t}}\ {{\ \ }}&{{\\displaystyle=M_{a i i0}\\left{\\frac{2B E H}{4A+F}\\left\[\\frac{(C-2A+F)-\\frac{2(C-A+F)\\Theta}{\[\\Theta+(C+F)\]}}{2e^{\\frac{C+F+\\Theta}{\[Theta\\Theta+(C+F)\]}}}\\right.\\right.}}&{{\\displaystyle\\left.(left1\ +.\\frac{(C-A2F F)}Theta{e e^{\\frac{C+F-\\Theta}{Delta\\Omega}}}\\right.\\right.}}&{{\\displaystyle\\left.\\left.\\left.-\\frac{B E H}{A\\Omega}\\right)e^{-A t}\\right\]\\right} _{t_{1}}^{t\_{2}}}\ {{\ }}&{{\\displaystyle}}}\ &{{{{\\displaystyledisplaystyle\\left\ \\left.-\\frac{(C-2A+F)-\\frac{2(C-A+F)\\Theta}{Delta Omega}}}\\right\]\ ..}}{{\\displaystyle\\left.\\left.\\left{\\frac{(C(--A+F)\\Theta}{A\ }right\]\]^^{t\_{2}}}\\right.\\right.}\\end.array}

\ \\mathrm t{{}\_\_{{}2}}

where the coefficients represented by G and H are listed below:

\\mathrm{G\ =}}\\frac{I n h}{V}

\\left(\\mathrm{M}\_{\\mathrm{a i r00}}\\right)

\\mathrm{H}!=!r\_{h m}f!\_{h m}

The overall risk is composed of inhalation risk and ingestion
risk. In this work it is assumed that these two types of risk are
independent of each other; in this case the overall risk is expressed
in Equation 18:

R i s k\_{o r e r l l l}=1-(1-R i s k\_{i n h})(1-R i s k\_{i n g})

In reality there is little evidence to assess the joint effects of
inhalation and ingestion exposures, but this assumption is
probably most defensible at low risk levels when the probability
of successful colonization by both routes is low.
Equations 17 and 18 solve the forward problem of estimating

Г°19Гһ

\ \\mathrm{t\_{m}}

of successful colonization by both routes is low.
Equations 17 and 18 solve the forward problem of estimating
risk from a known release amount. The inverse problem is to
estimate the release amount from measured environmental
concentrations. The amount of released pathogens (Mair0), can
be estimated by Equation 15, if the number of pathogens
deposited on the touched surfaces (M ) cantsbe acquired from
surface sampling and the time after release (t) is known. However,
the mass on touched surface is influenced by many parameters
such as touch rate and transfer rate, which are generally highly
uncertain. The mass on the untracked floor is most suitable for
estimating the release quantity as it provides an integration of air
concentration values over time without human interference. This
can be obtained by taking the expression from the fourth row of
Equation 4 and substituting Equation 14 for Mair:

\ \\mathrm({M}\_{\\mathrm{t s}})

\\mathrm{M\_\_{\\mathrm{a i r}}}

Once the release quantity (Mair0) is known, Equations 11, 12,
17, and 18 can be used to estimate risk. Concentrations in the
compartments omitted from Equation 13 (i.e., the compartments
that do not transfer microbes to other compartments, namely
HVAC filters, walls, nasal passages, and the external compartments) can be obtained by integrating the produce of the air
concentration and the transfer rates from the air over time.

\\mathrm(\\mathrm{M}\_{\\mathrm{a i r00}})

* * *

2.4.2 Prospective scenario. The prospective scenario
considers a case where the initial aerosol release has dissipated.
However, the time scale for attenuation of microbes can be much
longer on surfaces than in the air (i.e, pathogens on surfaces are not
subject to attenuation by deposition or by air exchange with the
exterior of the building). Thus much of the longer term risk to
occupants will come from microbes on surfaces as surface can both
serve as a reservoir for re-suspension into the air compartment and for
exposure via fomite contact. In such cases surfaces could be sampled
to assess whether a building is suitable for re-occupancy. Thus, the
prospective scenario can be thought of as a re-occupancy assessment.
The initial conditions are that Category A pathogens are present on
the touched surfaces in a quantity equal to the area of the touched
surfaces (Asurf) multiplied by the corresponding concentration (Csurf),
which would be estimated from surface sampling (Equation 21). Thus
the initial conditions can be expressed as:

\ \\mathrm(\\mathrm{A}\_{\\mathrm{s u r f}})

\\mathrm{(C\_{s u r f})}.

\\mathit{I n i t}=\\left\[\\begin{array}{c}{M\_{a i r}}\ {M\_{t s}}\ {M\_{f f}}\ {M\_{h}}\\end{array}\\right\]=\\left\[\\begin{array}{c}{0}\ {C\_{t s}A\_{t s}}\ {0}\ {0}\\end{array}\\right\]

Due to the longer time scale associated with the prospective
scenario, human-caused resuspension cannot be omitted. Thus,
the tracked floor compartment is included in the system of
equations to be solved:

Г°21Гһ

\\left(\\begin{matrix}{\\mathbf{\\dot{M\_{a i r}}}}\ {\\mathbf{\\dot{M\_{t s}}}}\ {\\mathbf{\\dot{M\_{t f}}}}\ {\\mathbf{\\dot{M\_{h}}}}\ {\\mathbf{\\dot{M\_{h}}}}\ \\end{matrix}\\right)=

Г°24Гһ

\\left(\\begin{array}{c c c c}{{-\ \ \ \ \ \\}}&{{\\up!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

\\begin{aligned}{d\_{d o s e-\\mathrm{{}}m}=}&{{};d\_{d o s e\_i n g}+d\_{d o s e\_i n g}}\ {=}&{{};\\int\_{0}^{\\infty}(\\frac{I n h}{V}M\_{a i r}+r\_{h n} _f h n M_{h})d t}\ {=}&{{}\\int\_{0}^{\\infty}(\\frac{I h h}{V}(\\overrightarrow{L}^{-1}\\overrightarrow{M(0)})\\overrightarrow{L} _{1}^{T}\\exp(-\\overrightarrow{N}t)}\ &{{};;;;+r_{h h f} _n f f_{m n}(\\overrightarrow{L}^{-1}\\overrightarrow{M(0)})\\overrightarrow{L}\_{4}^{T}\\exp(-\\overrightarrow{N}t))d t}\\end{aligned}

After acquiring the concentrations of the pathogen on different
surfaces over time (based on Equation 2), the total exposure dose
can be calculated via integration. To conservatively estimate
exposure dosage, one may use the maximum exposure duration
which is achieved if t1 = 0 and t2 = вҖҳ.

\\mathfrak{t}\_{1}=0

Г°22Гһ

\ !\ !{mathrm t}\_{2}!=!\\infty

The equations derived in this section provide the exposure input
for dose-response models (Equations 11 and 12) and thereby link
the surface concentration of a pathogen with an occupantвҖҷs future
risk. This procedure is shown in Information S1, and Equations 24
and 25 (25a is for ingestion risk, 25b is for dermal contact risk;
schematic figures are provided in Figures S1 and S2) are the
resulting approximate solutions for the exponential dose-response
model at low doses (i.e., where the Taylor series approximation is
accurate. A Comparison between approximated equations and
simulated results is provided in Information S1, table 1):

\\begin{array}{r l r}{{r i s k\_{r e t r o=!1!-}1-}1}&{{-(1-r i s k\_{i n h\_r e r t o})}(1-r i s k\_{i n g\_r e t o o})}\ {\\approx}&{{-}(1-R d\_{d o s e\_e n h\_r e r o o})(1-R d\_{R o o s\_e n i\_g n o\_e e r o o})}\ {\\approx}&{{1-}left\[left1-R M\_{a r r o}}\ {\\frac{I h}{V o}}\ {\\frac{1}{A}}\\left(1-e^{-A\\times480}\\right)\\right)\\right.}\ &{{\ }&{{\\left\[1-R M\_{a r r o}} _r{b}h}int{m}\\left\[r{s s}f_{s h}\\left(\\lambda\_{s s}f(1-e^{-A\\times480})\\right)\\right.\\right.}\ &{{\\left.\\left.\\frac{1}{\\phi\_{p o s s}}(1-e^{-\\phi\_{p r o s\ }\\times480})\\right\]\\frac{1}{\\phi\_{h a d d}}(1-e^{-\\phi\_{h a n d}\\times480})}\\end{array}\
\
(25a)\
\
\\begin{array}{r l}{r i s k\_{p r o s\_i n g}=1}&&{\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \\
\
(27a)\
\
\\begin{array}{r l}{r i s k\_{p r o s\_d e r m a l}=1-}&{(1-r i s k\_{i n h\_p r o s})(1-r i s k\_{d\ d e r m a l\_p r o s})}\ {{\\approx}1&{-}(1-R d\_{d o o s\_\_- _i h h\_p r o s})(1-R d_{d o s e\_d r r m a a\ _r r o s})}\ {\\approx1-}&{(1-R R_{t o s})\\frac{\\mu}{(1-\\frac{r\_{a}}{\\phi}{\\phi} **{\ h h r**\_o r o}}}\ {{\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \\
\
(1!-!R M\_{t s o}\\frac{\\frac{r\_{g h}J\_{s h}}{\\phi\_{p r o s}}\\frac{1}{\\phi\_{h a n d\_d e r m a l}}}{(1-\\frac{r\_{s h}f\_{s h}}{\\phi\_{p r o s}}\\frac{r\_{h h}J\_{h h}}{\\phi\_{h a n d\_d e r m a l}})})\
\
where rhmfhmis set to 1 for dermal contact, A is defined by\
Equation 5, and Qpros, and Qhandare given by:\
\
\\phi\_{p r o s}!=!\\mu!+!\\gamma\_{t s}!+!r\_{s h}f\_{s h}\
\
* * *\
\
Information S1, and then input this dose into the appropriate dose\
response model.\
\
2.5 Model Inputs\
Environmental decay rates, best fit dose-response models, and\
\
2.5 Model Inputs\
Environmental decay rates, best fit dose-response models, and\
dose response parameters for different pathogens are listed in\
Tables 1 and 2, while other parameters such as the dimensions of\
the room, the operational parameters of the HVAC system, the\
deposition velocities of released pathogens, etc. are included in\
Information S2, table 2). Since the particle size of a pathogen\
affects its deposition velocity, resuspension rate, filter removal, and\
even dose-response coefficient \[32\], this study considers four\
different aerodynamic diameters: 1 mM, 3 mM, 5 mM, and 10 mM.\
\
33),\
\
\\mathrm{l}\ \\upmu\\mathrm{M},3\ \\upmu\\mathrm{M},5\ \\upmu\\mathrm{M};\
\
Results\
\
Figure 2 presents the inhalation, ingestion and overall risks\
associated with the aerosol release (i.e., the retrospective scenario)\
of 1 micron Category A pathogens. The overall risk and inhalation\
risk match so closely as to be indistinguishable in the graph,\
indicating that risk from inhalation is the main component of\
overall risk. Particle deposition drives the time required for this risk\
to reach steady state. Hence, the time to reach this asymptote is\
the same for different pathogens of the same size.\
Figure 3 presents different types of risks associated with the\
\
Figure 2), because inhalation is more significant for small particle\
sizes, which remain in the air longer before settling. If pathogens\
are initially present on a surface (prospective scenario), the\
dominant exposure route is ingestion (see also Figure 3), and this\
trend is most significant for small particle sizes as they are least\
prone to resuspension.\
\
3.1 Linking pathogen concentrations to risk\
Another application of the model is to link measured pathogen\
\
To summarize which exposure routes dominate under which\
conditions, Figure 4 presents the ratio of accumulated inhalation\
and ingestion exposure. If pathogens are aerosolized (retrospective\
scenario), the dominant exposure route is inhalation (see also\
\
\ 2),\
\
3.1 Linking pathogen concentrations to risk\
Another application of the model is to link measured pathogen\
concentrations on the surfaces with health risk. In the case of a\
persistent pathogen, a surface concentration reflects a fraction of\
the integral of the air concentration (provided there has been no\
resuspension from the surface). In contrast, for a pathogen subject\
to environmental decay, surface concentrations reflect both the\
integrated air concentrations and surface decay over time. The\
relationship between surface concentration and accumulated\
(retrospective) dose changes as pathogen concentrations attenuate\
on the surface over time. As deposited microbes decay, each\
surviving microbe becomes indicative of a larger number having\
been present previously. Figure 5, which depicts the retrospective\
risk for a concentration of 10 pathogens per m2 on an HVAC\
filter, illustrates this. If one finds the concentration of Lassa virus\
particles is 10 pathogens per m2 with a diameter of 1 mmonan\
HVAC system filter 1 hour after a release, this implies that\
23\
occupants were subject to a risk of 1.0610 due to the past\
1 hour of exposure. The same concentration found 4 hours after\
22\
the release would imply a risk close to 1.0610, as fewer of the\
deposited virus remain viable after 4 hours. In reality it may not be\
realistic to detect pathogens in the environment on anything\
approaching the time scale of several hours, but this serves as an\
example of how great a challenge it is to use environmental\
samples to characterize risks associated with a pathogen that\
attenuates in the environment. In contrast risks associated a given\
concentration of B. anthracis (a persistent microbe) are relatively\
constant over time.\
The results of this modeling can be summarized in a series of\
\
1.0!\\times!10^{-3}\
\
\\mathrm{m}^{2}\
\
1.0!\\times!10^{-2}\
\
Table 2. Best Fit Dose-Response Model.\
\
a\
In exponential dose-response model, R is used as virulence coefficient, while in beta-Poisson dose-response model, the ratio of a/b is used as virulence coefficient.\
b\
The distributions are fitted to bootstrap samples of dose response parameters using @RISK \[62\].\
c\
The intestinal risk is replaced by cutaneous risk since the fractions of inhalational anthrax and cutaneous anthrax were the same in the 2001 anthrax letters attacks \[6\].\
\
| Pathogen | Strain information | Exposed animal and route | Dose-response function type | Best-fit Virulence coefficienta | Uncertainty ranges of virulence coefficients(95% Confidence Interval) | Uncertainty distributions and parameter used for virulence coefficientsb | Source |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| B. anthracisc | ATCC 6605 | Female Hartley guinea pigs(250 to 300g), intranasal | Exponential | $7.15\\times10^{-6}$ | $(6.26\\times10^{-6},7.43\\times10^{-6})$ | Normal distribution($\\mu=6.93\\times10^{-6},\\sigma=3.98\\times10^{-7}$) | \[59\] |\
| Y. pestis | CO92 | C57BL/6 mice, intranasal | Exponential | $1.02\\times10^{-3}$ | $(9.87\\times10^{-4},1.05\\times10^{-3})$ | Normal distribution($\\mu=1.02\\times10^{-3},\\sigma=1.91\\times10^{-5})$ | \[23\] |\
| F. tularensis | SCHU 5-4 | Monkey(4000-5000g), aerosol | Exponential | $5.32\\times10^{-2}$ | $(5.28\\times10^{-2},5.36\\times10^{-2})$ | Normal distribution($\\mu=5.32\\times10^{-2},\\sigma=2.22\\times10^{-4})$ | \[60\]d |\
| Variola major | Yamada | Swiss Webster albino mice(age from 2 hr to 6 days), intraperitoneal | Beta-Poisson | $2.31\\times10^{-6}$ | $(8.19\\times10^{-7},4.80\\times10^{-6})$ | Normal distribution($\\mu=2.65\\times10^{-6},\\sigma=1.21\\times10^{-6})$ | \[61\]e |\
| Lassa | NA | pigs(180 to 300g), aerosol | Beta-Poisson | $3.58\\times10^{-2}$ | $(4.16\\times10^{-4},5.59\\times10^{-1})$ | Log-Normal distribution($\\mu\_{\\mathrm{in}}=-1.69,\\sigma\_{\\mathrm{in}}=0.80)$ | \[57\]f |\
\
7.15!{\\times}!10^{-6}\
\
(6.26\\times10^{-6},7.43\\times10^{-}\
\
(9.87\\times10^{-4},,1.05\\times10^{-3})\
\
c\
The intestinal risk is replaced by cutaneous risk since the fractions of inhalational anthrax and cutaneous anthrax were the same in the 2001 anthrax letters attacks \[6\].\
d\
The data for 2.1 mm particles are used.\
e\
The data for 4.5 mm or less in diameter are used.\
\
e\
The data for 4.5 mm or less in diameter are used.\
f\
The data for the age group of 5 days and above are used.\
\
\\dot{(\\upmu\_{1n}=-1.69,,\\upsigma\_{1n}=0.80)}\
\
1.02!\\times!10^{-:}\
\
0=3.98\\times10^{-7}\
\
The data for the age group of 5 days and above are used.\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.t002\
\
(5.28\\times10^{-2},5.36\\times10^{-2})\
\
(\\mu!=!2.65!\\times!10^{-6},\
\
\\begin{array}{r}{(big up up mu=1.02\\times\\big10^{-3},}\ {\\upup=1\\upupir1\\times10up^{-5}\ }\\end{array}\
\
\\begin{array}{l}{\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \\
\
* * *\
\
Time (min)\
\
Figure 2. Different types of risks associated with aerosol release of 1 micron Category A pathogens. (Release quantity is 1000\
unclumped pathogens. For B. anthracis, the ingestion risk is replaced by cutaneous risk since the fractions of inhalational anthrax and cutaneous\
anthrax were the same in the 2001 anthrax letters attacks \[6\]).\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.g002\
\
different time periods (Figures 6 and 7 for pathogens of B. anthracis\
and Y. Pestis, while the rest are provided in the Information S3,\
Figures S3, S4, and S5). The difference between curves for the\
same pathogen for different time periods reflects the environmental persistence of the pathogen. A rapidly decaying pathogen will\
have widely separated curves to reflect that the same concentration\
of pathogens remaining after a longer time period implies a higher\
exposure risk (i.e., each pathogen remaining indicates that a\
greater number were present during the earlier part of the\
exposure period), while a persistent pathogen will have closely\
spaced curves as the risk to concentration relationship is relatively\
constant over time.\
There are essentially two options for addressing prospective (re-\
\
time scale for a 6-log risk reduction due to natural attenuation for\
different pathogens is shown in Table 3. Values in Table 3 vary by\
more than 4 orders of magnitude. B. anthracis has a best estimate of\
17,100 days or over 46 years. It is probably more appropriate to\
compare the upper bound as pathogens will reside in a wide\
variety of different microenvironments and decay rates would be\
expected to vary among microenvironments. Decontamination\
would only be achieved once even the pathogens in the more\
protected microenvironments have decayed. For B. anthracis this\
upper bound would be over 82 years. In contrast, a greater than 6\
order of magnitude decay of Lassa would occur in less than a day.\
These estimates are very sensitive to the assumption of log linear\
decay. Deviations from log linear decay are widely reported.\
However in many cases a biphasic approach could be adopted in\
which a rapid log-linear decay rate is used for the first several days\
and a second, lower log-linear decay rate is used subsequently.\
While parameters for such biphasic attenuation models are not yet\
available for these pathogens, the approach presented here can be\
readily adapted to biphasic decay. The relevant equations would\
be unchanged, but the mass distribution in each compartment at\
the end of the first phase would constitute the initial conditions for\
the second phase.\
\
* * *\
\
m2 for Lassa.\
For the prospective case (columns 3вҖ“5), if a pathogen decays\
rapidly, most of the risk will attenuate relatively rapidly. In such\
cases a much less stringent concentration standard can be set if\
access to the building is restricted for a period after the sampling is\
\
Figure 3. Different types of risks associated with surface release of 1 micron Category A pathogens. (Release quantity is 1000\
unclumped pathogens. For B. anthracis, the ingestion risk is replaced by cutaneous risk since the fractions of inhalational anthrax and cutaneous\
anthrax were the same in the 2001 anthrax letters attacks \[6\]).\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.g003\
\
7\\dot{3}6!\\times!10^{8}\
\
Table 4 presents the concentrations of pathogens associated\
with a 1 in 1000 risk. Concentrations corresponding to different\
risk levels can be found by multiplying these values by the desired\
23\
risk level/10, provided that the risk is low enough to be\
approximately a linear function of exposure (which is roughly\
22\
accurate for risks ,10). In the retrospective scenarios (the first\
two columns), the concentrations become lower (standards would\
become more stringent) as the time after the release increases.\
Values for B. anthracis presented here are substantially lower than\
reported previously \[12\], as the previous study considered only\
inhalation risk, while this study considers dermal risk as well as\
inhalation risk for B. anthracis. Even if sampling could be conducted\
within 24 hours (which is an extremely optimistic assumption), it\
would be difficult to characterize risk at the 1 in 1,000 level for any\
of the pathogens, as this would require quantifying pathogens at\
levels ranging from 5вҖ“7 pathogens/m2 for Variola major to 10вҖ“11/\
m2 for Lassa.\
For the prospective case (columns 3вҖ“5), if a pathogen decays\
\
The concentrations associated with immediate re-occupancy are\
in many cases well below applicable limits of detection. For\
example a negative sampling result for Lassa, used to estimate the\
prospective risk for immediate occupancy, would not provide\
much confidence because the applicable standard of 9 organisms\
per m2 is well below feasible detection levels. However, a negative\
result coupled with a 24-hour restriction on access would provide\
8\
some level of confidence as the standard for this case of 7.36610\
organisms per m2 is readily detectable. In this latter case,\
demonstrating achievement of a risk target of 1 in a million (a\
5\
concentration of 7.36610 organisms per m2 or 73.6 organisms\
per cm2) would likely be feasible as well. If one assumes that a\
0.09 m2 surface is sampled with a recovery of 0.38 \[12,33\], and a\
detection limit of 10 organisms, then the resulting minimum\
\
\\mathrm{m}^{2}\
\
0.09;\\mathrm{m}^{2}\
\
* * *\
\
Prospective Scenario\
\
Figure 4. The ratio of accumulative inhalation and ingestion exposure.\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.g004\
\
detectable pathogen concentration is 292 organisms per m2.\
Table 5 compares risks associated with this concentration across\
different organisms.\
\
\\mathrm{m}^{2}\
\
3.2 Parameter uncertainties\
Another objective of this study\
\
3.2 Parameter uncertainties\
Another objective of this study is to compare risk and\
uncertainties across different pathogens. The development of\
explicit formulae for exposure, that is Equations 24 and 25a(b),\
greatly simplifies uncertainty analysis. Using the input distributions\
listed in Table 1 and Table 2 with Equations 24 and 25a(b), a\
Monte Carlo analysis was carried out using to propagate\
uncertainties in input parameters through to uncertainties in risks\
for different pathogens. Results from retrospective and prospective\
scenarios are presented in the form of box plots (Figure 8). The\
relative risk presented by different pathogens in an air release are\
largely determined by their dose-response parameters, because the\
exposure duration in air is limited by the particle deposition rate\
(which is the same across different pathogens) rather than the\
decay rate. However, air decay rate does have an impact, when\
decay is rapid enough to occur over the time scale during which\
particulates are typically suspended (minutes to hours depending\
on the diameter of the particles) which is the case for Y. pestis, F.\
tularensis, and Lassa.,The relative risks for different pathogens in a\
surface release are affected by both fomite decay rates and dose-\
\
Correlations between the input parameter values and the model\
output (risk) are used to assess the importance of uncertainties in\
different parameters. These correlations were computed separately\
for each pathogen, for ingestion and inhalation risk for both the\
retrospective and prospective scenarios for all four particle sizes\
considered. Table 6 summarizes the 3 most important uncertain\
inputs by exposure pathway and scenario for each pathogen (with\
the range of values across the four particle sizes shown in brackets).\
Detailed results are included in the Information S4, tables 3вҖ“7).\
Uncertainties in mass transfer fraction from surface to hand (fsh)\
\
response parameters. In general the risk from releasing the same\
amount of pathogens can be ranked as Lassa, F. tularensis, Y. Pestis,\
B. anthracis, and Variola major (in decreasing order). This analysis\
does not include secondary transmission risks (which may be\
particularly important for all but B. anthracis and F. tularensis \[34\])\
and as such does not capture a critical component of risk for\
pathogens, such as Variola major, which are subject to secondary\
transmission. Instead it addresses the question as to which\
pathogens are subject to the greatest uncertainty in setting surface\
concentration standards for primary exposure. Uncertainties\
presented by Lassa are highest across most of the cases (extending\
over roughly an order of magnitude), indicating that this organism\
may be a priority for further study (pending consideration of\
factors such as its likely use in an attack).\
Correlations between the input parameter values and the model\
\
\ \ mathrm f(\_{\\mathrm{s h}})\
\
* * *\
\
Figure 5. Relationship between risks to the exposed people and pathogen concentration identified from the HVAC filter. (A\
concentration of 10 organisms/m2 was found at HVAC filter at different time after an aerosol release.).\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.g005\
\
Discussion\
\
dose is most closely related to the pathogen resuspension rate (m2).\
As noted above this analysis captures only one aspect of\
uncertainty, that of uncertainty in primary exposure. This may be\
the appropriate framework for pathogens that are not subject to\
secondary transmission as well as for decisions where one seeks to\
cut off environmental transmission of a pathogen after a\
widespread environmental contamination event. Additional risk\
and uncertainty would be applicable for decisions where\
secondary transmission is a concern.\
\
\ \ {\\mathrm{f}\_{\\mathrm{s h}}}}\
\
\\left(\\upmu\_{2}\\right)\
\
uncertainties for different pathogens. Efforts to develop an\
internet-based platform for the dissemination of microbial risk\
assessment tools such as this are in progress ( [http://wiki.camra](http://wiki.camra/).\
msu.edu/index.php?title = Main\_Page).\
In addition, this study also identified important parameter\
\
In addition, this study also identified important parameter\
uncertainties in risk assessment models. Specifically, the inputoutput correlations presented in Table 6 indicate which parameter\
uncertainties have the greatest effect on risk estimates. However,\
several other factors must be considered in settling research\
priorities. Whether the high correlation is due to variability or\
epistemic uncertainty is one such factor. Parameters such as\
inhalation rate and air exchange rate will vary considerably from\
person to person and from building to building, respectively.\
However, they are not subject to great epistemic uncertainty. The\
ranges within these parameters vary have already been well\
characterized. Additional research would not reduce the inherent\
variability in such parameters but only serve to further\
characterize an already well-characterized variability distribution.\
Another factor to consider is whether a particular parameter is\
\
* * *\
\
Accumulative risk associated with different concentrations of OB, antirhiza detected on HVAC filter from aerosol releases with different elapsed time\
\
Figure 6. Retrospective risks associated with B. anthracis HVAC concentrations after an aerosol release.\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.g006\
\
A third consideration is the extent to which an uncertainty is\
reducible by further research. Dose-response is an example of an\
uncertainty that is difficult to reduce through research. In part this\
is due to cost, as such research generally requires vertebrate\
animals and extensive biosafety precautions. There are other more\
fundamental challenges as well. Laboratory experiments 1) must\
be conducted at high doses with limited numbers of animals,\
leaving great uncertainty as to the effects of lower doses; 2)\
generally do not consider the effects of previous exposures, which\
might greatly affect the dose response coefficients; and 3) must be\
conducted with animal models that may not accurately represent\
human dose response. Despite these limitations, further animal\
studies would at least reduce the confidence intervals for the doseresponse parameters used here. These dose-response model\
parameter uncertainties are the uncertainties reflected in the\
\
extensive biosafety precautious are significant.\
As an example of how one might integrate these different factors,\
Table 7 summarizes the authorsвҖҷ view of future research priorities\
based on these different factors. In Table 7, The percentages in the\
right hand columns indicate the frequency with which the parameter\
was one of the top three sources of uncertainty for different\
pathogens (the retrospective scenario percentages are based on\
inhalation risk, and the prospective scenario percentages are based\
on ingestion risk). A low research priority for research is assigned to\
all three parameters subject to variability rather than epistemic\
uncertainty: breathing rate, density, and air exchange rate. The\
remaining 6 parameters all were judged to be subject to epistemic\
uncertainty. The degree of вҖҳвҖҳGeneralityвҖҷвҖҷ (divided into 3 categories in\
order of priority: common across pathogens, similarities expected,\
pathogen specific) was an important factor in distinguishing among\
high and medium priority parameters, with both of the medium\
\
* * *\
\
Accumulative risk associated with different concentrations of Pests detected on HVAC filter from aerosol releases with different elapsed time\
\
Concentrations of Y. Pestis on HVAC filter\
\
7.50!{\\times}!10^{-1}\
\
Table 3. Time scale for a 6-log risk reduction due to natural\
attenuation.\
\
3.00!\\times!10^{4}\
\
1.24!\\times!10^{4}\
\
Figure 7. Cumulative retrospective risks associated with Y. pestis HVAC concentrations after an aerosol release.\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.g007\
\
8.46\\times{10}^{-1}\
\
4.63\\times10^{-1}\
\
5.75!\\times!10^{1}\
\
1.71!\\times!10^{4}\
\
8.38\\times10^{1}\
\
1.44\\times\\ensuremath{10}^{1}\
\
5.79\\times10^{1}\
\
priority parameters (decay on fomites and decay in the air)\
considered to be pathogen specific. Three of the high priority\
parameters (resuspension rate, hand surface contact rate, and mass\
transfer fraction for surface to hand) were ranked highly partly\
because similarities across organisms would be expected making\
surrogate research more generally relevant and partly because the\
input-output correlations indicated they were important parameters.\
Dose-response parameters were given high priority for research\
\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.t003\
\
The fate and transport model is based on the assumption that\
pathogens are instantly uniformly mixed in a compartment. This\
fails to capture the short-term dynamics associated with the\
immediate vicinity of a release. For example, surface samples might\
not be reflective of the localized high concentrations associated with\
opening a letter containing pathogens and might underestimate risk\
in this case. A more detailed approach, such as computational fluid\
dynamics, would be a useful extension to this study.\
The study also considers risk from a release of only one\
\
* * *\
\
23\
Table 4. Concentrations of pathogens on horizontal surfaces associated with risk of 10 (Prospective exposure duration = 1 year).\
\
| Pathogen | Diameter | Concentrations(organisms/m2) |  |  |  |  |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| Retrospective sampling8 hours after release | Retrospective sampling24 hours after release | Prospective for immediate occupancy | Prospective after24 hours access restriction | Prospective after48 hours access restriction |  |  |\
| B. anthracis | 1ОјM | 1.63 | $1.73\\times10^{-1}$ | $2.98\\times10^{1}$ | $2.98\\times10^{1}$ | $2.98\\times10^{1}$ |\
| 3ОјM | 4.15 | $4.38\\times10^{-1}$ | $6.44\\times10^{2}$ | $6.74\\times10^{2}$ | $7.09\\times10^{2}$ |  |\
| 5ОјM | 7.40 | $7.65\\times10^{-1}$ | $1.88\\times10^{3}$ | $2.02\\times10^{3}$ | $2.20\\times10^{3}$ |  |\
| 10ОјM | $1.63\\times10^{1}$ | 1.42 | $7.62\\times10^{3}$ | $1.23\\times10^{4}$ | $2.11\\times10^{4}$ |  |\
| Y. pestis | 1ОјM | $2.60\\times10^{-3}$ | $1.36\\times10^{-6}$ | $1.79\\times10^{2}$ | $8.99\\times10^{6}$ | $4.91\\times10^{11}$ |\
| 3ОјM | $9.80\\times10^{-3}$ | $2.47\\times10^{-6}$ | $1.78\\times10^{2}$ | $9.27\\times10^{6}$ | $5.34\\times10^{11}$ |  |\
| 5ОјM | $1.26\\times10^{-2}$ | $2.51\\times10^{-6}$ | $1.76\\times10^{2}$ | $9.46\\times10^{6}$ | $5.87\\times10^{11}$ |  |\
| 10ОјM | $1.24\\times10^{-2}$ | $1.72\\times10^{-6}$ | $1.75\\times10^{2}$ | $1.81\\times10^{7}$ | $2.03\\times10^{12}$ |  |\
| F. tularensis | 1ОјM | $2.39\\times10^{-4}$ | $2.70\\times10^{-6}$ | 1.72 | $5.08\\times10^{2}$ | $1.60\\times10^{5}$ |\
| 3ОјM | $7.62\\times10^{-4}$ | $4.28\\times10^{-6}$ | 1.72 | $5.28\\times10^{2}$ | $1.73\\times10^{5}$ |  |\
| 5ОјM | $9.02\\times10^{-4}$ | $4.17\\times10^{-6}$ | 1.72 | $5.34\\times10^{2}$ | $1.82\\times10^{5}$ |  |\
| 10ОјM | $8.23\\times10^{-4}$ | $2.75\\times10^{-6}$ | 1.79 | $1.09\\times10^{3}$ | $7.03\\times10^{5}$ |  |\
| Variola major | 1ОјM | $3.12\\times10^{1}$ | 7.00 | $1.12\\times10^{3}$ | $1.38\\times10^{3}$ | $1.62\\times10^{3}$ |\
| 3ОјM | $7.35\\times10^{1}$ | 7.69 | $1.35\\times10^{3}$ | $1.76\\times10^{3}$ | $2.17\\times10^{3}$ |  |\
| 5ОјM | $8.01\\times10^{1}$ | 7.80 | $1.60\\times10^{3}$ | $2.17\\times10^{3}$ | $2.74\\times10^{3}$ |  |\
| 10ОјM | $7.49\\times10^{1}$ | 5.84 | $4.77\\times10^{3}$ | $1.15\\times10^{4}$ | $2.59\\times10^{3}$ |  |\
| Lassa | 1ОјM | $6.61\\times10^{-6}$ | $1.94\\times10^{-11}$ | 8.93 | $7.36\\times10^{8}$ | $7.32\\times10^{16}$ |\
| 3ОјM | $2.28\\times10^{-5}$ | $4.39\\times10^{-11}$ | 8.93 | $7.93\\times10^{8}$ | $8.05\\times10^{16}$ |  |\
| 5ОјM | $3.97\\times10^{-5}$ | $4.90\\times10^{-11}$ | 9.11 | $8.26\\times10^{8}$ | $8.86\\times10^{16}$ |  |\
| 10ОјM | $4.02\\times10^{-5}$ | $3.25\\times10^{-11}$ | 8.45 | $1.49\\times10^{9}$ | $3.03\\times10^{17}$ |  |\
\
1.73\\times{10}^{-1}\
\
5~\\upmu\\mathfrak{M}\
\
10;\\upmu\\mathrm{M}\
\
2.98!\\times!10^{1}\
\
4.38!\\times!10^{-1}\
\
1.63\\times10^{1}\
\
2.02!\\times!10^{3}\
\
2.20!\\times!10^{3}\
\
1~\\upmu\\boldsymbol{M}\
\
7.09\\times10^{2}\
\
2.60!{\\times}!10^{-3}\
\
3;\\upmu\\
\
1.36!{\\times\ }10^{-6}\
\
2.11\\times\\ensuremath{10^{4}}\
\
9.80\\times10^{-3}\
\
2.47\\times{10}^{-6}\
\
4.91!\\times!10^{11}\
\
5~\ \ \\mumu\\boldsymbol\
\
1.26!\\times!10^{-2}\
\
2.51!{\\times}!10^{-6}\
\
9.27\\times{10^{6}}\
\
5.34\\times{10}^{11}\
\
10;\\upmu\\mathrm{M}\
\
9.46!\\times!10^{6}\
\
1.24!\\times!10^{-2}\
\
5.87\\times{10}^{11}\
\
1.72!\\times!10^{-6}\
\
2.39\\times{10}^{-4}\
\
3;\\upmu\\
\
2.70!\\times!10^{-6}\
\
1.81\\times10^{7}\
\
2.03\\times10^{12}\
\
7.62!\\times!10^{-4}\
\
5~\ \ \\mumu\\mathrm\
\
4.28!\\times!10^{-6}\
\
1.60!\\times!10^{5}\
\
10;\\upmu\\mathrm{M}\
\
5.28\\times10^{2}\
\
4.17\\times{10}^{-6}\
\
8.23\\times{10}^{-4}\
\
1~\\upmu\\boldsymbol{M}\
\
1.73\\times10^{5}\
\
2.75\\times{10}^{-6}\
\
3,\\upmu\\mathfrak{}M\
\
1.82!\\times!10^{5}\
\
3.12!\\times!10^{1}\
\
5~\ \ mu M\
\
7.35\\times10^{1}\
\
8.01!\\times!10^{1}\
\
7.03\\times10^{5}\
\
10,\\upmu\\mathrm{m}\
\
1.62!\\times!10^{3}\
\
1~\\upmu\\boldsymbol{M}\
\
7.49\\times10^{1}\
\
1.76\\times10^{3}\
\
2.17\\times10^{3}\
\
3~\\upmu\\mathfrak{M}\
\
2.74\\times!10^{3}\
\
6.61!\\times!10^{-6}\
\
2.28\\times10^{-5}\
\
1.15!\\times!10^{4}\
\
5~\\upmu\\mathfrak{M}\
\
1.94!\\times!10^{-11}\
\
3.97\\times{10}^{-5}\
\
4.39\\times10^{-11}\
\
2.59!\\times!10^{3}\
\
7.36\\times10^{8}\
\
4.90!\\times!10^{-11}\
\
10,\\upmu\\mathrm{M}\
\
7.32!\\times!10^{16}\
\
4.02\\times10^{-5}\
\
8.05\\times10^{16}\
\
8.86!\\times!10^{16}\
\
3.25\\times10^{-}\
\
3.03\\times10^{17}\
\
Table 5. Equipment detection limit associated risk\*.\
\
| Pathogen | Diameter | Risk(95% confidence interval) |\
| --- | --- | --- |\
| B. anthracis | $1\\mu M | 2.30\\times 10^{-2}(5.81\\times 10^{-4},4.33\\times 10^{-1})$ |\
| $3\\mu M | 6.80\\times 10^{-4}(2.25\\times 10^{-5},6.54\\times 10^{-3})$ |  |\
| $5\\mu M | 1.92\\times 10^{-4}(1.00\\times 10^{-5},1.16\\times 10^{-3})$ |  |\
| $10\\mu M | 1.17\\times 10^{-5}(3.18\\times 10^{-6},2.84\\times 10^{-4})$ |  |\
| Y. pestis | $1\\mu M | 2.86\\times 10^{-3}(9.63\\times 10^{-5},1.63\\times 10^{-2})$ |\
| $3\\mu M | 2.85\\times 10^{-3}(1.01\\times 10^{-4},1.58\\times 10^{-2})$ |  |\
| $5\\mu M | 2.84\\times 10^{-3}(1.04\\times 10^{-4},1.51\\times 10^{-2})$ |  |\
| $10\\mu M | 2.69\\times 10^{-3}(1.04\\times 10^{-4},1.37\\times 10^{-2})$ |  |\
| F. tularensis | $1\\mu M | 2.57\\times 10^{-1}(1.54\\times 10^{-2},9.17\\times 10^{-1})$ |\
| $3\\mu M | 2.55\\times 10^{-1}(1.58\\times 10^{-2},8.96\\times 10^{-1})$ |  |\
| $5\\mu M | 2.54\\times 10^{-1}(1.60\\times 10^{-2},8.65\\times 10^{-1})$ |  |\
| $10\\mu M | 2.31\\times 10^{-1}(1.56\\times 10^{-2},8.06\\times 10^{-1})$ |  |\
| Variola major | $1\\mu M | 2.79\\times 10^{-4}(9.72\\times 10^{-6},6.10\\times 10^{-4})$ |\
| $3\\mu M | 2.43\\times 10^{-4}(7.84\\times 10^{-6},5.06\\times 10^{-4})$ |  |\
| $5\\mu M | 2.14\\times 10^{-4}(5.93\\times 10^{-6},4.06\\times 10^{-4})$ |  |\
| $10\\mu M | 7.35\\times 10^{-5}(3.42\\times 10^{-6},3.32\\times 10^{-4})$ |  |\
| Lassa | $1\\mu M | 5.43\\times 10^{-2}(1.04\\times 10^{-2},7.00\\times 10^{-1})$ |\
| $3\\mu M | 5.43\\times 10^{-2}(1.09\\times 10^{-2},7.00\\times 10^{-1})$ |  |\
| $5\\mu M | 5.42\\times 10^{-2}(1.12\\times 10^{-2},6.99\\times 10^{-1})$ |  |\
| $10\\mu M | 5.26\\times 10^{-2}(1.12\\times 10^{-2},6.95\\times 10^{-1})$ |  |\
| \*It is assumed that the detection limit is 10 organisms which comes from sampling a 0.09 mВІ surface with the pathogen concentration 292 organisms per mВІ and the recovery rate is 0.38 \[12\]. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.t005 |  |  |\
\
1~\\upmu\\mathrm{M}\
\
6.80!\\times!10^{-4}\
\
2.30\\times10^{-2}(5.81\\times10^{-4},4.33\\times10^{-1})\
\
1.92!{\\times}!10^{-4}\
\
(2.25!\\times!10^{\\cdot}\
\
^{5},,6.54!\\times!10^{-3})\
\
10,\\upmu\\mathrm{m}\
\
1.17!\\times!10^{-5}\
\
5,\\upmu\\
\
\\begin{array}{r}{\\mathrm{ ~~i~~}\\upmu mathrm w\\{{}}}&{\ \ \ ag\ \*\ \ \ \\end{array}\
\
5.26\\times10^{-2}(1.12\\times10^{-2},6.95\\times10^{-1})\
\
2.14!\\times!10^{-4}\
\
10;\\upmu\\mathrm{m}\
\
1;\\upmu\\mathrm{M}\
\
5.43\\times10^{-2}(1.09\\times10^{-2},7.00\\times10^{-1})\
\
2.31!\\times!10^{-1}\
\
1.58!\\times!10^{-2})\
\
2.86\\times10^{-3}(9.63\\times10^{-5},,1.63\\times10^{-2})\
\
2.84\\times10^{-3}(1.04\\times10^{-4},1.51\\times10^{-2})\
\
(1.56\\times10^{-2},8.06\\times10^{-1})\
\
2.57\\times10^{-1}(1.54\\times10^{-2},9.17\\times10^{-1})\
\
5.42\\times10^{-2}(1.12\\times10^{-2},6.99\\times10^{-1})\
\
m^{2}\
\
(\\mathrm{i.e.,\ B}}\
\
m^{2}\
\
so that future research can be prioritized.\
This study modeled environmental fate and transport using a\
small number of homogeneous compartments when in reality\
surfaces may vary in characteristics, such as the frequency with\
which they are touched, the rate at which pathogens attenuate\
(influenced in turn by relative humidity, intensity of ultraviolet\
light, etc. \[10\]), and the ease with which pathogens are reaerosolized or transferred to hands from them. Modeling these\
heterogeneities may improve our understanding of pathogen fate\
and transport in the environment but would require detailed\
parameter inputs beyond what are currently available in the\
literature. Such heterogeneities might provide protected microenvironments that could allow pathogens to persist longer and\
present greater health risks than estimated here, which makes this\
a priority for future research.\
The framework developed here may help inform whether active\
\
* * *\
\
Table 6. Parameter uncertainties with most influence on risk.\
\
| Pathogen | Retrospective scenario |  | Prospective scenario |  |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| Ingestion risk | Inhalation risk | Ingestion risk | Inhalation risk |  |\
| B. anthracis | Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.66-0.76) | Air change rate(ACH)(0.31-0.72) | Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.63-0.87) | Air change rate(ACH)(0.44-0.75) |\
| Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.21-0.36) | Breathing rate(lnh)(0.27-0.65) | Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.16-0.32) | Breathing rate(lnh)(0.14-0.53) |  |\
| Air change rate(ACH)(0.081-0.21) | Density of the particle(pp)(0.052-0.61) | Resuspension rate(Ој2)(0.047,0.29) | Resuspension rate(Ој2)(0.022-0.32) |  |\
| Y. pestis | Decay rate on fomite(Оіt)(0.56-0.61) | Breathing rate(lnh)(0.73-0.78) | Decay rate on fomite(Оіt)(0.53-0.56) | Decay rate on fomite(Оіt)(0.51-0.63) |\
| Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.47-0.51) | Air change rate(ACH)(0.28-0.52) | Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.34-0.38) | Resuspension rate(Ој2)(0.21-0.35) |  |\
| Density of the particle(pp)(0.12-0.24) | Density of the particle(pp)(0.026-0.54) | Hand-surface contacting rate(rhs)(0.071-0.079) | Breathing rate(lnh)(0.15-0.18) |  |\
| F. tularensis | Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.44-0.67) | Decay rate in the air(Оіair)(0.46-0.75) | Decay rate on fomite(Оіt)(0.64-0.65) | Decay rate on fomite(Оіt)(0.42-0.59) |\
| Decay rate in the air(Оіair)(0.23-0.43) | Breathing rate(lnh)(0.35-0.69) | Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.41-0.47) | Resuspension rate(Ој2)(0.18-0.33) |  |\
| Decay rate on fomite(Оіt)(0.33-0.49) | Decay rate on fomite(Оіt)(0.18-0.42) | Hand-surface contacting rate(rhs)(0.12-0.13) | Decay rate in the air(Оіair)(0.14-0.26) |  |\
| Variola major | Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.45-0.67) | Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.44-0.73) | Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.60-0.67) | Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.30-0.61) |\
| Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.38-0.54) | Air change rate(ACH)(0.19-0.54) | Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.51-0.57) | Air change rate(ACH)(0.25-0.45) |  |\
| Lassa | Air change rate(ACH)(0.11-0.37) | Breathing rate(lnh)(0.25-0.40) | Resuspension rate(Ој2)(0.15-0.46) | Resuspension rate(Ој2)(0.25-0.39) |\
| Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.60-0.70) | Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.69-0.87) | Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.72) | Dose-response coefficient(r)(0.61-0.80) |  |\
| Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.40-0.47) | Breathing rate(lnh)(0.26-0.28) | Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand(fsh)(0.51) | Breathing rate(lnh)(0.17-0.23) |  |\
| Decay rate in the air(Оіair)(0.057-0.21) | Decay rate in the air(Оіair)(0.082-0.31) | Resuspension rate(Ој2)(0.26-0.40) | Decay rate in the air(Оіair)(0.089-0.24) |  |\
\
(\\mathrm{f}\_{\\mathrm{s h}})\
\
i(f\_{s h}\
\
(\\mathtt{f}\_{\\mathtt{s h}})\
\
\ {mathrm f(\_s\\)}}\
\
(\\mathsf{p}\_{\\mathsf{p}})\
\
(r\_{h s})\
\
(mathrm f{f\_s h})\
\
(\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{a i r}})\
\
(y\_i i i)\
\
1\\left((\\mathbf{f}\_{s h}\\right)\
\
(\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{f}})\
\
(f\_{s h})\
\
(\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{a i r}})\
\
(f\_{s h})\
\
(f\_{s h})\
\
(\\upmu\_mathrm2)\
\
Correlation coefficients between selected parameters and risks. Correlations were computed separately for each of four modeled particle sizes (1, 3, 5, and 10 mM diameter\
particles), and the smallest and the largest coefficients across the four modeled particle sizes are listed in the brackets. (Raw data are included in Information S4).\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.t006\
\
\\mathsf{p}\_{\\mathsf{p}}\
\
\\mathtt{Y e s}^{\*}\
\
| Authors' priority | Parameter | Symbol | Uncertainty vs. Variability | Generality | Researchable | Percentage in the top 3 uncertainty parameters among retrospective scenario(%)$ ^{+}$ | Percentage in the top 3 uncertainty parameters among prospective scenario(%)$ ^{+}$ |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| High | Mass transfer fraction from surface to hand | fsh | Both | Similarities expected | Yes | 0 | 33 |\
| High | Dose-response coefficients | k | Both | Pathogen specific | Difficult | 13 | 20 |\
| High | Resuspension rate | $\\mu\_{2}$ | Both | Similarities expected | Yes | 0 | 20 |\
| High | Hand-surface contacting rate | rhs | Both | Similarities expected | Yes | 0 | 13 |\
| Moderate | Decay rate on fomite | $\\gamma\_{f}$ | Both | Pathogen specific | Yes | 7 | 13 |\
| Moderate | Decay rate in the air | $\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{air}}$ | Both | Pathogen specific | Yes | 13 | 0 |\
| Low | Breathing rate | Inh | Variability | Common across pathogen | Yes | 33 | 0 |\
| Low | Air change rate | ACH | Variability | Common across pathogen | Yes | 20 | 0 |\
| Low | Density of the particle | ПҒp | Variability | Common across pathogen | Yes\* | 13 | 0 |\
\
\*Density can readily be measured but it is not clear that laboratory values could reflect density in an actual release.\
+\
The percentages in the retrospective scenario are based on inhalation risk in the retrospective scenario, while the percentages in the prospective scenario are based on\
\
\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{a i r}}\
\
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032732.t007\
\
* * *\
\
This analysis considered viable organisms. However, the\
environmental concentrations which would be used as inputs to\
the risk models developed here would likely be measured by\
quantitative PCR (qPCR), which has been proven effective in\
quantifying biological warfare agents (i.e., B. antracis, and Y. pestis)\
due to its rapid, early, and accurate results \[38\]. Despite the\
advantages of qPCR analysis, several knowledge gaps need to be\
addressed The first is that the qPCR does not distinguish between\
living or dead pathogens. While researchers have identified assays\
to discriminate between viable and dead fecal bacteroidales bacteria,\
similar methods have not been applied to Category A pathogens\
\[39,40\]. Second there is little information on the decay of the\
qPCR signal over time, which would be an essential parameter for\
the retrospective assessment of risk after a release. Thus, studies\
are needed to quantify parameters such as, the efficiency of DNA\
\
1^{\\mathrm{s t}}\
\
3^{\\mathrm{r d}}\
\
Figure S4 Cumulative retrospective risks associated\
with Variola major HVAC concentrations after an\
aerosol release.\
(TIF)\
\
Figure S5 Cumulative retrospective risks associated\
with Lassa HVAC concentrations after an aerosol release.\
(TIF)\
\
Figure S2 Pathogen flow for estimating the ingestion\
dose in the prospective scenario.\
(TIF)\
\
* * *\
\
Information S1 The simplification of risk assessment\
model.\
(DOC)\
\
(DOC)\
\
Information S2 Model Inputs.\
(DOC)\
\
(DOC)\
\
Information S3 Cumulative retrospective risks associated with pathogens (F. tularensis, Variola major and\
Lassa) HVAC concentrations after an aerosol release.\
(DOC)\
\
References\
\
01. Waterer GW, Robertson H (2009) Bioterrorism for the respiratory physician.\
    Respirology 14: 5вҖ“11.\
02. Pohanka M, Skladal P (2009) Bacillus anthracis, Francisella tularensis and\
    Yersinia pestis. The most important bacterial warfare agents - review. Folia\
    Microbiologica 54: 263вҖ“272.\
03. Webb GF (2003) A silent bomb: The risk of anthrax as a weapon of mass\
    destruction. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United\
    States of America 100: 4355вҖ“4356.\
04. Sabelnikov A, Zhukov V, Kempf CR (2006) Airborne exposure limits for\
    chemical and biological warfare agents: Is everything set and clear? International\
    Journal of Environmental Health Research 16: 241вҖ“253.\
05. Block SM (2002) The growing threat of biological weapons. Molecular Biology\
    of the Cell 13: 3вҖ“11.\
06. Lesperance A (2008) Catastrophic Incident Recovery: Long-Term Recovery\
    from an Anthrax Event Symposium. Richland, WA: Pacific Northwest National\
    Laboratory.\
07. CLTV website. Cleanup of anthrax will cost hundreds of millions of dollars.\
    Available: [http://cltv.trb.com/entertainment/bal-te.anthrax18-](http://cltv.trb.com/entertainment/bal-te.anthrax18-)\
    dec18,1,1593731.story.\
08. Hong T (2009) Estimating Risk of Exposure to Bacillus Anthracis based on\
    Environmental Concentration. Philadelphia: Drexel.\
09. Sextro RG, Lorenzetti DM, Sohn MD, Thatcher TL (2002) Modeling the\
    spread of anthrax in buildings. Proceedings of the Indoor Air 2002 Conference.\
    Monterey, CA, . pp 506вҖ“511.\
10. Sinclair R, Boone SA, Greenberg D, Keim P, Gerba CP (2008) Persistence of\
    category A select agents in the environment. Applied and Environmental\
    Microbiology 74: 555вҖ“563.\
11. Price PN, Sohn MD, Lacommare KSH, McWilliams JA (2009) Framework for\
    evaluating anthrax risk in buildings. Environmental Science & Technology 43:\
    1783вҖ“1787.\
12. Hong T, Gurian PL, Ward NFD (2010) Setting Risk-Informed Environmental\
    Standards for Bacillus Anthracis Spores. Risk Analysis 30: 1602вҖ“1622.\
13. Tellier R (2009) Aerosol transmission of influenza A virus: a review of new\
    studies. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 6: S783вҖ“S790.\
14. Wein LM, Atkinson MP (2009) Assessing Infection Control Measures for\
    Pandemic Influenza. Risk Analysis 29: 949вҖ“962.\
15. Atkinson MP, Wein LM (2008) Quantifying the routes of transmission for\
    pandemic influenza. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 70: 820вҖ“867.\
16. Nicas M, Gang S (2006) An integrated model of infection risk in a health-care\
    environment. Risk Analysis 26: 1085вҖ“1096.\
17. Nicas M, Best D (2008) A study quantifying the hand-to-face contact rate and its\
    potential application to predicting respiratory tract infection. Journal of\
    Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 5: 347вҖ“352.\
18. Weber TP, Stilianakis NI (2008) Inactivation of influenza A viruses in the\
    environment and modes of transmission: A critical review. Journal of Infection\
    57: 361вҖ“373.\
19. Aledort J, Lurie N, Wasserman J, Bozzette S (2007) Non-pharmaceutical public\
    health interventions for pandemic influenza: an evaluation of the evidence base.\
    Bmc Public Health 7: 208.\
20. Smieszek T (2009) A mechanistic model of infection: why duration and intensity\
    of contacts should be included in models of disease spread. Theoretical Biology\
    and Medical Modelling 6: 25.\
21. Julian TR, Canales RA, Leckie JO, Boehm AB (2009) A Model of Exposure to\
    Rotavirus from Nondietary Ingestion Iterated by Simulated Intermittent\
    Contacts. Risk Analysis 29: 617вҖ“632.\
22. Ferguson AC, Canales RA, Beamer P, Auyeung W, Key M, et al. (2006) Video\
    methods in the quantification of childrenвҖҷs exposures. Journal of Exposure\
    Science and Environmental Epidemiology 16: 287вҖ“298.\
23. Lathem WW, Crosby SD, Miller VL, Goldman WE (2005) Progression of\
    primary pneumonic plague: A mouse model of infection, pathology, and\
    bacterial transcriptional activity. Proceedings of the National Academy of\
    Sciences of the United States of America 102: 17786вҖ“17791.\
24. Titball RW, Sjostedt A (2003) Francisella tularensis: an overview. Asm News 69:\
    558вҖ“563.\
25. Djavani M, Yin C, Xia L, Lukashevich IS, Pauza CD, et al. (2000) Murine\
    immune responses to mucosally delivered Salmonella expressing Lassa fever\
    virus nucleoprotein. Vaccine 18: 1543вҖ“1554.\
26. Roman S (2008) Advanced Linear Algebra. New York: Springer.\
\
Information S4 Correlation coefficients between input\
parameters and different pathogens.\
(DOC)\
\
References\
\
Conceived and designed the experiments: TH YH PLG CNH. Performed the\
experiments: TH YH. Analyzed the data: TH YH PLG. Contributed\
reagents/materials/analysis tools: TH YH PLG CNH. Wrote the paper: TH\
PLG.\
\
Author Contributions\
\
27. Nazaroff WW, Cass GR (1989) Mathemtical-modeling of indoor aerosol\
    dynamics. Environmental Science & Technology 23: 157вҖ“166.\
28. Xu MD, Nematollahi M, Sextro RG, Gadgil AJ, Nazaroff WW (1994)\
    Deposition of tobacco-smoke particles in a low ventilation room. Aerosol Science\
    and Technology 20: 194вҖ“206.\
29. Lai ACK, Nazaroff WW (2000) Modeling indoor particle deposition from\
    turbulent flow onto smooth surfaces. Journal of Aerosol Science 31: 463вҖ“476.\
30. Haas CN, Rose JB, Gerba CP (1999) Quantitative Microbial Risk Assessment.\
    New York: Wiley.\
31. Haas CN (2002) Conditional dose-response relationships for microorganisms:\
    Development and application. Risk Analysis 22: 455вҖ“463.\
32. Bartrand TA, Weir MH, Haas CN (2008) Dose-response models for inhalation\
    of Bacillus anthracis spores: Interspecies comparisons. Risk Analysis 28:\
    1115вҖ“1124.\
33. Lim DV, Simpson JM, Kearns EA, Kramer MF (2005) Current and developing\
    technologies for monitoring agents of bioterrorism and biowarfare. Clinical\
    Microbiology Reviews 18: 583вҖ“607.\
34. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Bioterrorism Agents/\
    Diseases. Available: [http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/agentlist-category.asp](http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/agentlist-category.asp). Accessed 2012 Feb 8.\
35. Morgan MG, Henrion M, Morris SC, Amaral DAL (1985) Uncertainty in risk\
    assessment. Environmental Science & Technology 19: 662вҖ“667.\
36. Mitchell-Blackwood J, Gurian PL (2010) Finding Risk-Based Switchover Points\
    for Response Decisions for Environmental Exposure to Bacillus anthracis (in press).\
    Human and Ecological Risk Assessment.\
37. Huang Y, Hong T, Bartrand TA, Gurian PL, Haas CN, et al. (2010) How\
    sensitive is safe? Risk-based targets for ambient monitoring of pathogens. Sensors\
    Journal, IEEE 10: 668вҖ“673.\
38. West JS, Atkins SD, Emberlin J, Fitt BDL (2008) PCR to predict risk of airborne\
    disease. Trends in Microbiology 16: 380вҖ“387.\
39. Dorevitch S, Ashbolt NJ, Ferguson CM, Fujioka R, McGee CD, et al. (2010)\
    Meeting Report: Knowledge and Gaps in Developing Microbial Criteria for\
    Inland Recreational Waters. Environ Health Perspect 118: 871вҖ“876.\
40. Bae S, Wuertz S (2009) Discrimination of Viable and Dead Fecal Bacteroidales\
    Bacteria by Quantitative PCR with Propidium Monoazide. Applied and\
    Environmental Microbiology 75: 2940вҖ“2944.\
41. Ruijter JM, Ramakers C, Hoogaars WMH, Karlen Y, Bakker O, et al. (2009)\
    Amplification efficiency: linking baseline and bias in the analysis of quantitative\
    PCR data. Nucleic Acids Research 37: e45.\
42. Bushon RN, Kephart CM, Koltun GF, Francy DS, Schaefer FW, et al. (2010)\
    Statistical assessment of DNA extraction reagent lot variability in real-time\
    quantitative PCR. Letters in Applied Microbiology 50: 276вҖ“282.\
43. Busson B (1911) Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Lebensdauer von Bacterium coli und\
    Milzbrandsporen. . 58 p.\
44. Mitscherlich E, Marth EH (1984) Microbial survival in the environment:\
    bacteria and rickettsiae important in human and animal health. Berlin,\
    Germany: Springer-Verlag.\
45. Graham-Smith GS (1930) The longevity of dry spores of B. anthracis. Journal of\
    Hydrology 30: 213вҖ“215.\
46. Novel R, Reh T (1947) De la longevite des spores du Bacillus anthracis et de la\
    conservation des pouvoirs pathogene et antigene. Schweiz Z Pathol Bakteriol 10:\
    180вҖ“192.\
47. Szekely AV (1903) Beitrag zur Lebensdauer der Milzbrandsporen. Z Hyg\
    Infectionskrankh 44: 359вҖ“363.\
48. Won WD, Ross H (1966) Effect of diluent and relative humidity on apparent\
    viability of airborne pasteurella pestis. Applied and Environmental Microbiology\
    14: 742вҖ“745.\
49. Rose LJ, Donlan R, Banerjee SN, Arduino MJ (2003) Survival of Yersinia pestis\
    on environmental surfaces. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 69:\
    2166вҖ“2171.\
50. Wilkinson TR (1966) Survival Of Bacteria On Metal Surfaces. Applied\
    Microbiology 14: 303вҖ“307.\
51. Cox CS, Goldberg LJ (1972) Aerosol Survival Of Pasteurella-Tularensis And\
    Influence Of Relative Humidity. Applied Microbiology 23: 1вҖ“3.\
52. Cox CS (1971) Aerosol Survival Of Pasteurella-Tularensis Disseminated From\
    Wet And Dry States. Applied Microbiology 21: 482вҖ“486.\
53. Ehrlich R, Miller S (1973) Survival Of Airborne Pasteurella-Tularensis At\
\
\\mathrm{o f}\
\
Wet And Dry States. Applied Microbiology 21: 482вҖ“486.\
53\. Ehrlich R, Miller S (1973) Survival Of Airborne Pasteurella-Tularensis At\
Different Atmospheric Temperatures. Applied Microbiology 25: 369вҖ“372.\
\
* * *\
\
54. Harper GJ (1961) Airborne Micro-Organisms-Survival Tests With 4 Viruses.\
    Journal of Hygiene 59: 479вҖ“486.\
\
55. Harper GJ (1963) The influence of environment on the survival of airborne virus\
\
56. Harper GJ (1963) The influence of environment on the survival of airborne virus\
    particles in the laboratory. Arch Gesamte Virusforsch 13: 64вҖ“71.\
\
57. Mahl MC, Sadler C (1975) Virus Survival On Inanimate Surfaces. Canadian\
\
\
arthropod-borne members of the Bunyaviridae family. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73: 2547вҖ“2551.\
59\. Altboum Z, Gozes Y, Barnea A, Pass A, White M, et al. (2002) Postexposure\
prophylaxis against anthrax: Evaluation of various treatment regimens in\
intranasally infected guinea pigs. Infection and Immunity 70: 6231вҖ“6241.\
60\. Day WC, Berendt RF (1972) Experimental tularemia in Macaca mulatta:\
relationship of aerosol particle size to the infectivity of airborne Pasteurella\
tularensis. Infect Immun 5: 77вҖ“82.\
61\. Marshall RG, Gerone PJ (1961) Susceptibility of suckling mice to variola virus.\
J Bacteriol 82: 15вҖ“19.\
62\. @RISK website. Available: [http://www.palisade.com](http://www.palisade.com/). Accessed 2011 Oct 10.\
\
56. Mahl MC, Sadler C (1975) Virus Survival On Inanimate Surfaces. Canadian\
    Journal of Microbiology 21: 819вҖ“823.\
\
57. Stephenson EH, Larson EW, Dominik JW (1984) Effect of environmental factors\
\
58. Stephenson EH, Larson EW, Dominik JW (1984) Effect of environmental factors\
    on aerosol-induced lassa virus infection. Journal of Medical Virology 14:\
    295вҖ“303.\
\
59. Hardestam J, Simon M, Hedlund KO, Vaheri A, Klingstom J, et al. (2007) Ex\
\
60. Hardestam J, Simon M, Hedlund KO, Vaheri A, Klingstom J, et al. (2007) Ex\
    vivo stability of the rodent-borne hantaan virus in comparison to that of