RESEARCH ARTICLE

Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-
CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

OPEN ACCESS

1,3,4
Tobias S. BrettID1\*, Shweta Bansal2, Pejman Rohani

Citation: Brett TS, Bansal S, Rohani P (2023)
Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2
transmission in Washington state. PLoS Comput
Biol 19(6): e1011263. [https://doi.org/10.1371/](https://doi.org/10.1371/)
journal.pcbi.1011263

1 Odum School of Ecology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States of America, 2 Department
of Biology, Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., United States of America, 3 Department of Infectious
Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States of America,
4 Center for Influenza Disease & Emergence Research (CIDER), Athens, Georgia, United States of America

Editor: Daniel B. Larremore, University of Colorado
Boulder, UNITED STATES

Accepted: June 12, 2023

Received: August 24, 2022

Funding: TSB, SB and PR were supported by the
National Institute Of General Medical Sciences of

Published: June 28, 2023

Peer Review History: PLOS recognizes the
benefits of transparency in the peer review
process; therefore, we enable the publication of
all of the content of peer review and author
responses alongside final, published articles. The
editorial history of this article is available here:
[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263)

- [tsbrett@uga.edu](mailto:tsbrett@uga.edu)

Abstract

The spread of SARS-CoV-2 has been geographically uneven. To understand the drivers of
this spatial variation in SARS-CoV-2 transmission, in particular the role of stochasticity, we
used the early stages of the SARS-CoV-2 invasion in Washington state as a case study. We
analysed spatially-resolved COVID-19 epidemiological data using two distinct statistical
analyses. The first analysis involved using hierarchical clustering on the matrix of correlations between county-level case report time series to identify geographical patterns in the
spread of SARS-CoV-2 across the state. In the second analysis, we used a stochastic transmission model to perform likelihood-based inference on hospitalised cases from five counties in the Puget Sound region. Our clustering analysis identifies five distinct clusters and
clear spatial patterning. Four of the clusters correspond to different geographical regions,
with the final cluster spanning the state. Our inferential analysis suggests that a high degree
of connectivity across the region is necessary for the model to explain the rapid inter-county
spread observed early in the pandemic. In addition, our approach allows us to quantify the
impact of stochastic events in determining the subsequent epidemic. We find that atypically
rapid transmission during January and February 2020 is necessary to explain the observed
epidemic trajectories in King and Snohomish counties, demonstrating a persisting impact of
stochastic events. Our results highlight the limited utility of epidemiological measures calculated over broad spatial scales. Furthermore, our results make clear the challenges with predicting epidemic spread within spatially extensive metropolitan areas, and indicate the need
for high-resolution mobility and epidemiological data.

Author summary

Geographic structure in human populations has been widely recognised as a key determinant in the spread of infectious diseases, however the mechanisms underlying it are hard
to disentangle. Using two distinct statistical analyses, we sought to address questions surrounding the impact of movement patterns and stochastic events on the spatial spread of
SARS-CoV-2 in Washington state. Through our first analysis, which made use of a clustering algorithm, we uncovered a relationship between spatial proximity and the similarity the National Institutes of Health under Award
Number R01GM123007. PR was supported by
federal funds from the National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health and Human Services,
under Contract No. 75N93021C00018 (NIAID
Centers of Excellence for Influenza Research and
Response, CEIRR). The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institutes of Health. The funders had no
role in study design, data collection and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.

Competing interests: None.

of epidemic trajectories. Clusters of similar trajectories formed a clear geographical pattern. In our second analysis, we performed statistical inference on time series data from
the Puget Sound region of Washington state. From our inference, we found that both a
high degree of connectivity and atypically fast transmission within the first few weeks of
the outbreak were necessary to explain the rapid inter-county spread. Furthermore, this
stochastic early spread had a lasting effect on the subsequent epidemic course as nonpharmaceutical interventions were insufficient to temporarily eradicate the virus from the
region.

Introduction

SARS-CoV-2, the viral cause of COVID-19, was first detected in samples from Wuhan, China,
in late December 2019 \[1, 2\]. Before travel restrictions were enacted, air travel led to the virus
being rapidly dispersed globally \[3\]. The first confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection in the US was
on January 15 2020 in Snohomish county, Washington state \[4\], less than three weeks after its
reported discovery in Wuhan, prompting intensive contact tracing efforts \[5\]. A lack of community testing meant that sustained transmission was not suspected until an outbreak in a
long-term care facility was detected in neighbouring King county on February 28 \[6\]. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that cryptic community transmission had been ongoing in Washington
state since late January, likely due to a separate introduction from China \[7\], and that cases
were substantially under-reported \[8\]. In response, through March 2020 there was an increase
in non-pharmaceutical interventions including work-from home orders, mandated closures of
dine-in restaurants and recreational establishments and a prohibition of large gatherings \[9\].
On the state-level, confirmed cases in Washington peaked at the start of April, followed by a
smaller summer wave and then a large winter wave (Fig 1A). After the introduction of mass
adult vaccination in spring 2021 there have been further waves, including ones associated with
each of the alpha, delta and omicron variants of concern (VOC). Geographically, there is substantial separation between populations, which are divided into 39 administrative counties
(Fig 1B). On the county-level, we see extensive variation among epidemic trajectories (Fig 1C).
The importance of spatial population structure for determining the transmission dynamics

In this study we intended to understand how stochasticity in the transmission process combined with commuting network structure to shape the initial phases of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic. Furthermore, we sought to do this in the face of time-varying trends in case
ascertainment and localised variation in the rollout of public health intervention measures and

Studies using spatially-explicit transmission models have been performed to understand facets
of the COVID-19 pandemic, including quantifying the impact of vaccination and the emergence of novel variants on disease burden \[19\], reconstructing undocumented infections and
their impact on estimates of infection fatality ratios \[20, 21\], and understanding the invasion
dynamics of novel variants \[22\] and their transmission advantage over previously circulating
strains \[23\].
In this study we intended to understand how stochasticity in the transmission process com-

* * *

B

C

Fig 1. Early dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic in WA. A) Broadly, the spread of SARS-CoV-2 can be characterised into successive waves—three
prior to the introduction of mass vaccination in early 2021, and then three post-vaccination waves each associated with a variant of concern: first alpha,
then delta, then omicron. The changes in the relative peak sizes of weekly confirmed cases, newly hospitalized cases and deaths highlight some of issues
with uncovering SARS-CoV-2 spread. In particular, we draw attention to the relatively small number of confirmed cases during the first wave, likely
due to limited testing capacity. B) Further complicating understanding spread is the spatial distribution of the population. Around 70% of the
population is concentrated in the Puget Sound region (King, Pierce, Snohomish, Thurston and Kitsap counties) with other population clusters
including the Tri-cities area and Yakima valley (Benton, Franklin and Yakima counties) and the cities of Spokane, Bellingham and Vancouver (in
Spokane, Whatcom and Clark counties respectively). C) Focusing on the pre-vaccination period, time series of county-level hospitalizations exhibit
clear variation across counties. Map makes use of TIGER/Line Shapefiles from the U.S. Census Bureau ( [https://www.census.gov/geographies/mappingfiles.html](https://www.census.gov/geographies/mappingfiles.html)).

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g001)

compliance (e.g. extent of social distancing). To accomplish this, we interrogated time series
data from Washington state using two statistical analyses. We first used a clustering analysis to
examine spatial patterns, uncovering clear geographic structure to the spread of SARS-CoV-2.
This highlights the potential limitations in using state-level incidence data to infer epidemiological mechanisms. We subsequently used a stochastic spatial transmission model to perform
likelihood-based inference on hospitalizations time series data from five counties in the Puget
Sound region (belonging to two clusters in the preceding analysis and including the Seattle
metropolitan area). Maximisation of the likelihood and uncertainty quantification was
achieved using a refinement of the iterated filtering algorithm \[32, 33\]. We found that the data
are most consistent with a high degree of connectivity across the region. Concordant with the
findings of phylogenetic studies \[7\], our results suggest that a single introduction was responsible for much of the early outbreak. However, to achieve the outbreak size observed in March
and April our inference favours an earlier time of introduction in mid-January (contemporaneous with the first identified case), rather than at the start of February. Furthermore, our
results suggest that the size of the outbreak in Snohomish and King counties required atypically rapid spread (both inter- and intra-county) within the first couple of weeks after
introduction.

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

Our results highlight that when an introduction escapes detection and successfully seeds an outbreak, the resulting outbreak can be substantially larger and more widespread than pre- dicted by deterministic models of epidemic growth. Together, our results testify to the lasting impacts of geography and stochasticity on the spread of SARS-CoV-2, with ramifications for on-going attempts at forecasting epidemic trajectories—in particular within densely populated urban areas.

**Results**

## State-wide clustering analysis of epidemiological time series

To understand which counties in Washington state experienced similar epidemic trajectories, and whether these similarities were related to spatial proximity, we performed a clustering analysis of the rank correlation (quantified using Spearman’s ρ) among county-level time series of weekly confirmed cases per 10 5 (Fig 2; see S1 and S2 Figs for the underlying time series data). Three sparsely populated counties, Garfield, Skamania and Wahkiakum, with populations under 5,000 were excluded due to insufficient data. We found dynamics of COVID-19 were positively correlated between all pairs of counties, with correlation ranging from ρ = 0.27 (between Yakima and Whitman) to ρ = 0.98 (between Clark and Spokane) (Fig 2A). To explore groupings in the pair-wise correlation between counties, we performed a clus- tering analysis using hierarchical agglomerative clustering with a maximum linkage criterion (Fig 2B). We found specific closely linked groupings of neighboring counties, including Pierce, Kitsap and Mason, Franklin and Benton, and King and Snohomish. However, other closely linked counties were geographically far apart, in particular Clark, Spokane and Thurston. Based on the silhouette score (a measure of clustering performance \[34\], see S3 Fig), we detected five clusters (Fig 2B). Mapping these clusters elucidates clear geographic patterns (Fig 2C). Three of the five clusters were contiguous: the first (yellow) centered around the Puget Sound region includes Seattle (located in King), the second (orange) includes the Yakima val- ley and its confluence with the Columbia river in the Tri-cities area (located on the border of Franklin and Benton) and the third (teal) in the rural north central region. Of the two remain- ing clusters, one (blue) is mostly contiguous apart from Ferry, which is the the most distantly linked county in the data set. The final cluster (pink) is the largest, comprising a number of urban and rural areas across the entire state (including the previously mentioned Pierce, Kit- sap, Clark, Spokane and Thurston counties). We repeated the analysis on weekly hospitalizations data (S4 Fig). The data were substan- tially noisier, due to the smaller numbers of infections that were hospitalized, which is reflected in lower entries in the correlation matrix. Overall, the clusters were less well defined, as quanti- fied using the silhouette score (S5 Fig). As might be expected, the impact of increased noise is most pronounced on the clustering of smaller counties. Apart from Thurston, the top ten most populous counties all remain in the same clusters (S4 Fig).

## Statistical inference using spatio-temporal data from the Puget Sound

**region**

To investigate further the factors driving county-level differences in epidemic trajectories, including the role of human mobility patterns and non-pharmaceutical interventions, we used a stochastic spatial transmission model to perform statistical inference on county-level weekly hospitalizations data. For the analysis, we selected five counties, belonging to two clusters, that form the core of the Puget Sound metropolitan area: King, Pierce, Snohomish, Thurston and

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 4 / 22

* * *

A

B

C

Fig 2. Analysis of temporal correlation in pre-vaccination incidence time series in WA state. A) Correlation matrix
of Spearman’s ρ for each pairing of WA counties. Three sparsely populated counties (Garfield, Skamania and
Wahkiakum) were excluded from the analysis due to insufficient data. B) Results of agglomerative clustering
performed on the correlation matrix. Based on the silhouette score, we identify five distinct epidemiological clusters.
C) Map of identified clusters. We observe a clear spatial structure to the clustering: i) a cluster predominantly of
counties from Seattle northwards bordering the Puget Sound (yellow), ii) a cluster including the Yakima valley and
Tri-cities area (orange), iii) two rural clusters in eastern Washington (teal and blue) and iv) a state-wide cluster (pink).
Map makes use of TIGER/Line Shapefiles from the U.S. Census Bureau ( [https://www.census.gov/geographies/](https://www.census.gov/geographies/)
mapping-files.html).

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

2021, prior to both i) the introduction of mass vaccination and ii) the introduction of VOCs in 2021 (with phylogenetic evidence suggesting that in 2020 co-circulating strains in Washington had comparable reproductive numbers \[35\]). We further filtered the data to include only hos- pitalized cases aged under 60, due to sustained transients in older age groups (possibly due to their increased ability to socially distance compared to school- and work-aged individuals, see S6 Fig). To model the impact of county-specific non-pharmaceutical interventions, for each county we introduced a resident reproductive number, R res _i_, defined as the expected number of cases caused by a non-commuting individual who remains in county i with a fully susceptible population. This function was parameterised for each county via a set of basis function coeffi- cients, which were estimated from incidence data (see Methods). In addition, we also obtained maximum likelihood estimates for four region-wide parameters: the baseline reproductive number (R0), the probability an infection was aged under 60 and hospitalized (ρ), the average number of weekly cases imported to the region (η) and the baseline pre-social distancing frac- tion of total contacts a commuting individual would have in their commuting destination (). Maximising the log-likelihood was accomplished in two steps (see Methods). First, for each point on a grid of region-wide parameter values we used iterated filtering to maximise the log- likelihood over the space of basis function parameters (S7 Fig). This likelihood surface shows a trade-off in model performance between R0, ρ and η, which we attribute to all three parameters affecting the apparent size of a growing epidemic. The fraction of contacts in the commuting destination, , does not trade off with any of the other region-wide parameters. Maximum like- lihood estimates for all parameters were subsequently obtained by maximising the likelihood over the grid, with profile likelihoods and 95% confidence intervals (estimated using Wilks’ theorem \[36\]) for each region-wide parameter shown in Fig 3A–3D.

**Fig 3. Profile likelihoods and reconstructed connectivity matrix from the inference analysis. A–D) Profile**

likelihoods are shown for the four estimated global parameters: the baseline reproductive number (A), the probability an infection is under 60 and hospitalized (B), the weekly rate infections are imported into the population assuming full susceptibility (C) and the pre-pandemic fraction of contacts that commuting individuals have in their commuting destination (D). The dashed horizontal line corresponds to 2 log-likelihoods below the maximum. E) Reconstructed connectivity matrix (see Methods) incorporating census commuting data and the maximum likelihood estimate of the commuting parameter (see panel D). [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g003)

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 6 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

A sensitive question in this inference is the start date of the epidemic. In the analysis above, we assumed a starting date of January 12 (the date of the first reported case in Washington state). However, a phylogenetic study by Worobey et al. \[7\] suggested the outbreak was initi- ated during the week beginning January 26 (the median of their posterior distribution), we therefore examined the sensitivity of our statistical inference to initializing on this date. We found the model performance (considering only the data post-January 26) was 7.7 log-likeli- hoods lower compared with an outbreak starting in the week of January 12. In addition, with the later start date, the maximum likelihood estimate for η suggests an average of 8 introduc- tions per week, with η = 0 lying outside the 95% confidence interval, making it extremely improbable that all infections in the outbreak were descended from a single introduction (as suggested by the results of Worobey et al. \[7\]). This is in contrast with our inference using the earlier January 12 start date, where the MLE was η = 0 (Fig 3C). Using the demographic data, commuting data and our maximum likelihood estimate for , we reconstructed the connectivity matrix: the proportion of daily contacts an individual resi- dent in the origin county has with individuals in the destination county. We found that the reconstructed connectivity matrix is the same regardless of whether a January 12 or January 26 start date was used (Fig 3E). At the beginning of the pandemic (before the impact of local vari- ation in R res

_i_), this also gives the proportion of transmission in each destination county by an
infectious individual resident in the origin. As explained above, R re _i_ s is the reproductive number of individuals who do not travel outside of their county of residency. The reproductive number for commuters is a weighted sum of _R_ res _i_ in their origin and commuting destination. Time-variation in R res _i_ alters the rate of trans- mission between individuals located in a county–either due to residency or commuting (Fig

4). We find that non-pharmaceutical interventions sharply reduced R
res _i_ in all five counties, with a particularly sharp drop in Thurston (Fig 4I) and Kitsap (Fig 4J). Crucially, while non- pharmaceutical interventions drove R res _i_ below 1, they were of insufficient extent and duration to eliminate SARS-CoV-2 in the Puget Sound region. Subsequent waves in the summer and winter were driven by time-varying trends in R re _i_ s .

## Impact of stochasticity on the epidemic trajectory in the Puget Sound

**region**

Our maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) for the commuting parameter was = 1, i.e. the strongest connectivity possible (see Fig 3D). To understand why the model favoured high spa- tial connectivity, we systematically varied and investigated the log-likelihood of each week’s incidence conditioned on the preceding data, i.e. ln P(x _t_ \|{x _s_}\*s<t\*), which we refer to as the con- ditional log-likelihood (CLL; Fig 5A). The CLL paints a picture of how well the model explains each data point and helps identify those that contribute most to the overall log-likelihood, which is the sum of the CLL across all weeks. We find that the CLL follows a similar trajectory regardless of the value of , and is generally lowest when the epidemic is largest, an expected consequence of both demographic stochasticity \[37\] and observation error (see Eq 10). More insight can be gained into the dependence of the CLL on by calculating the relative CLL, found by subtracting the CLL corresponding to the MLE = 1 (Fig 5B). We see that lower val- ues of (darker colors) are penalised the most early in the epidemic (pre-April 2020), and have the lowest relative CLL. During April and May, there is a suggestion that smaller values of have a larger CLL than the MLE (relative CLL > 0). To quantify these observations further, we measure the association between the CLL and for each week using Kendall’s τ (Fig 5C). Pre- March 2020 lockdown, we see the largest values of τ, implying the strongest positive associa- tion between and CLL. After the start of lockdown, Kendall’s τ drops. Indeed, during late

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 7 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

**Fig 4. Time series of weekly COVID-19 hospitalizations and maximum likelihood estimates of the resident**

**reproductive number for the five counties studied in inference analysis. A–E) Weekly hospitalized cases under the** age of 60 for King (A), Pierce (B), Snohomish (C), Thurston (D) and Kitsap (E). Inference was performed on hospitalizations data rather than confirmed cases due to temporal variation in testing access (see main text). F–J) Reconstructed maximum-likelihood estimates of the resident reproductive number for each county (see Methods for details). Time-varying trends reflect the combined impact of all non-pharmaceutical interventions (including social distancing and mask wearing). Non-pharmaceutical interventions were assumed to start in the week beginning March 1 2020, i.e. immediately after the first discovery of sustained SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the state. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g004)

April and May, we see a period where τ < 0, implying a negative association between and CLL. From June onwards τ stabilises, fluctuating about a smaller positive value than pre-lock- down, indicating a weaker positive association. Overall, we see that the main reason the model parameterized with higher values of performs better is due to an increased ability to fit the data pre-April 2020. In addition to investigating the CLL, we also investigated the importance of each weekly hospitalisations data point in determining the subsequent course of the regional epidemic (Fig 5D). This was quantified via the log-probability of the final week’s hospitalizations data (week beginning January 31 2021), x _T_, conditioned on all data up-to-and-including week t, Q _t_ = ln P (x _T_ \|{x _s_} _st_). An increase (decrease) in Q _t_ in week t implies that the new observation x _t_ increases (decreases) the probability of observing x _T_ at the later time T. We see the largest rise in Q _t_ during March and April, implying that the impact of early sto- chastic events persisted over the entire period of study. Subsequently, there is little increase in _Qt_ between April and October 2020, implying that individual stochastic fluctuations which occurred during this second period had limited lasting impact. Finally, from around October onward we see an accelerating rise in Q _t_. This observation is to be expected, and is analogous to the time series autocorrelation rising as the lag between observations shrinks \[37\]. Overall we find Q _t_ is positively associated with , as expected given our results for the CLL (Fig 5A– 5C). To investigate the dynamical impacts of these early stochastic events, we simulated 50,000 realizations of our fitted transmission model (Fig 6). We find that if the simulations are initial- ized in the week beginning January 12 2020 (when the first case of COVID-19 was detected in Washington state), the mean trajectory (calculated by averaging over all realizations) predicts

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 8 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

**Fig 5. Investigation of the dependence of model performance on the commuting parameter, . A) Conditional log-**

likelihood for each week of data. The model parameters for each line maximise the overall log-likelihood with constrained to the value indicated in the legend. Consequently, summing over all weeks for a particular value of gives the corresponding value of the profile log-likelihood shown in Fig 3D. B) Conditional log-likelihood relative to the maximum ( = 1). C) Kendall’s τ coefficient for each week, quantifying the association between conditional log- likelihood and . A more positive (negative) τ indicates a stronger positive (negative) association between and the conditional log-likelihood for that week’s data. D) Log-probability of the final week’s data (week beginning January 31

2021. conditioned on all data up to and including the week indicated (Q _t_). Results show a large jump in Q _t_ over the course of the first month, indicating the importance of atypical spread in disseminating the virus across the region. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g005) lower hospitalizations than observed throughout the epidemic (Fig 6A). The most similar real- ization (as quantified via sum of squared errors) tracks the data closely, however falls in the tail of the distribution, suggesting it is an atypical trajectory. If, instead, we simulate from the model using the state of the most similar trajectory in the week of February 9 (i.e. 4 weeks after the first confirmed case) as the initial condition, we find that the sample mean overlaps the data, and the variance among simulated realizations is much smaller (Fig 6B). This substanti- ates our earlier observations regarding the pronounced early increase in Q _t_(Fig 5D). Our results suggest that rapid, atypically intensive transmission within the first couple of weeks after introduction is necessary to generate the epidemic trajectories observed in King and Sno- homish counties. Subsequently, the epidemic is sufficiently large that it followed a roughly deterministic trajectory determined by the combined effects of non-pharmaceutical interven- tions and susceptible depletion.

## Model validation

Finally, from our simulated trajectories at the MLE initialised on February 9 2020 (Fig 6B), we reconstructed the cumulative prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in Washington state

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 9 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

**Fig 6. Comparison of simulated trajectories using the maximum likelihood parameter estimates with observed**

**data. A) Simulated trajectories for King county initialized on January 12 2020. Blue shading corresponds to the** probability mass estimated from 50,000 sampled trajectories, with the sample mean shown in red. The orange curve is the observed hospitalizations data used for parameter inference, and lies in the tail of the probability distribution— suggesting an atypical trajectory. Also shown is the simulated trajectory most similar to the observed data (grey curve) as calculated via the sum of errors. B) Simulated trajectories for King county initialized on February 9 2020 using the state variables of the most similar sample (see panel A). Our results suggest that, once the initial atypical stochastic spread had occurred, the subsequent epidemic trajectory was largely a deterministic response to non-pharmaceutical interventions and susceptible depletion. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g006](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g006)

through time (Fig 7). We compared our reconstruction with those from four published studies \[38–41\]. We also compared our simulations with estimates of SARS-CoV-2 antibody seroprev- alence released by the CDC \[42, 43\]. We find our simulations are broadly consistent with two studies (Davis et al. \[38\] and Wu et al. \[41\]), and are smaller than the estimates of Pei et al. \[39\] and Reese et al. \[40\] by a factor about 1.5 and 3 respectively.

**Discussion**

In this study we sought to understand the combined effects of stochasticity and spatial connec- tivity on the initial spread of SARS-CoV-2 in Washington state. Spatial heterogeneity in the spread of SARS-CoV-2 has been observed elsewhere \[19–23, 38\], and, as our results suggest, Washington state is no exception. Our findings reveal substantial regional variation in the progress of the epidemic across the state, even prior to the geographically uneven uptake of vaccines (Fig 2). Through our study of the metropolitan Puget Sound region, we find that high connectivity (Fig 3D) coupled with rapid early stochastic transmission(Figs 5 and 6) is neces- sary to explain the inter-county spread of the virus. In combination, our results highlight the

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 10 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

**Fig 7. Comparison of reconstructed prevalence with estimates from the literature. Using our simulated trajectories**

initialised on February 9 2020 (see Fig 6B), we estimated the cumulative percentage of the population exposed to SARS-CoV-2 in the Puget Sound region (blue). We compared our estimate to a) time series data of confirmed cases in the Puget sound region (black) b) estimates from four studies (orange, green, red, brown) \[38–41\] and c) estimates of the seroprevalence in Washington state from serological data (purple) \[42, 43\]. Caution must be taken in reading these results as the studies used different statistical approaches and spatial aggregations. Davis et al., Pei et al. and Wu et al. all used Bayesian approaches, results shown are the median and the 90% (Davis et al.) and 95% (Pei et al. and Wu et al.) credible interval. The results shown from Reese et al. and the seroprevalence study are the mean and 95% confidence intervals. Our results show the mean and 95% percentile of simulations, accounting for stochastic variability but not parametric uncertainty (see Fig 3). Furthermore, the results from Pei et al. are for the Western Washington region (which includes the Puget sound region), the results from Davis et al., Wu et al., and the seroprevalence study are for the entire state, and the results of Reese et al. are for the combined states of Alaska, Idaho, Oregon and Washington. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g007](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263.g007)

limited utility of epidemiological measures calculated over broad spatial scales, which can con- ceal emerging transmission hot spots and local variation in reproductive number. Our clustering analysis is able to identify a “typical” Washington state COVID-19 trajectory in 2020: three temporal waves of successively increasing magnitude in spring, summer and winter (the pink cluster shown in Fig 2). The presence of this “typical” highly-correlated cluster stands in contrast with the “travelling wave” pattern of spatial spread, observed for many human infectious diseases (including dengue \[10\], pertussis \[44\], measles \[14\], and influenza \[15\]). Instead, this cluster points to a remarkable degree of synchrony in the epidemic trajecto- ries of counties from across the state. For instance, the mid-sized Clark, Spokane and Thurston counties are among the most highly rank correlated (see Fig 2A) and have a near-simultaneous initial epidemic take-off (see S10 Fig) despite their geographic separation. The drivers of this synchrony are likely complex and multifaceted, however we suspect it stems from a combina- tion of i) near-simultaneous seeding of the epidemic across the state (aside from the early seed- ing of the Seattle metropolitan area) and ii) state-wide imposition of social distancing measures (including a prohibition of large gatherings and restaurant closures in spring and a mask mandate in summer 2020) \[9\]. Importantly, we identify four clusters of contiguous counties that deviate from this typical trajectory. For instance, the yellow cluster, centered on King and Snohomish counties (together 40% of the state’s population) had an atypically early and large initial wave, likely due to a combination of it being seeded directly from China \[7, 8\] and rapid early transmission (see below). We hypothesize that other factors were at play in the orange Yakima valley cluster,

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 11 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

where the initial non-pharmaceutical interventions in spring 2020 appear to have been less effective at controlling transmission than elsewhere, prolonging the spring wave into the sum- mer. Our clustering analysis highlights how state-level indicators can be misleading, for instance suggesting a growing state-wide epidemic when infections are confined to specific regions, or delaying the identification of transmission hot spots, such as in the Yakima valley during April 2020. We found that the importance of spatial mobility patterns in determining the Puget Sound epidemic trajectory was most acute during the initial phase of the epidemic, i.e. before the identification of community transmission. By considering the conditional log-likelihood of each weekly data point, we found there was the strongest positive association between model performance and connectivity strength prior to the March 2020 interventions (see Fig 5). Dur- ing this period, high spatial connectivity provides the highest likelihood of the observed rapid transmission between Snohomish and King counties. Once the epidemic was established across the region, the subsequent county-level trajectories were less sensitive to the value of the commuting parameter, reflecting a weaker association with model performance. Our results suggest that accurate quantification of mobility is most important in contexts where incidence is low. Our reconstruction of the cumulative prevalence of infection in the Puget Sound region suggests that over the course of 2020 about 7% of the population were exposed to SARS-CoV-

2. While our reconstructed prevalence is consistent with two previous studies \[38, 41\], it also broadly tracks the estimated seroprevalence in Washington state published by the CDC \[42\]. Given this estimate has not been corrected for seroreversion \[43\], it likely provides an underes- timate of the overall percentage of the population exposed to SARS-CoV-2. Our reconstructed prevalence is also lower that in two other studies \[39, 40\]. This difference could in part be explained by our use of the MLE for model parameters in our reconstruction. In fitting the data, there is a trade-off in model performance between outbreak size and the parameter ρ, the probability an infection was aged under 60 and hospitalized: As ρ decreases a larger epidemic is needed to fit the data. The 95% confidence interval on ρ allows for epidemics that are about 50% larger, which would be broadly consistent with Pei et al., however the estimate of Reese et al., from a study using serological data, is about 300% larger \[40\]. This discrepancy may stem from their estimate being for the combined states of Alaska, Idaho, Oregon and Washington. After sustained community transmission in Washington state was first identified at the end of February 2020, our results suggest that behavioural changes and other non-pharmaceutical interventions over the course of March rapidly reduced the resident reproductive number from around 2.6 (an estimate consistent with a number of other studies, e.g. \[2, 20\]) to below 1 in all of the Puget Sound region counties (see Fig 4). During the period of study, we estimate a limited impact of susceptible depletion on SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Instead, our results sug- gest that the recurrent outbreaks were driven by trends in human behavioural practices (see
   e.g. \[45\]) and non-pharmaceutical interventions such as social distancing and mask mandates. Although our analysis cannot rule out a putative role of seasonality (either in viral transmissi- bility \[46\] or human susceptibility to infection \[47\]), its impact is expected to be small due to the high population-level susceptibility \[48\]. Our analysis highlights some of the challenges in constraining spatial epidemiological mod- els using census commuting data, a common practice in epidemiological modeling (see e.g. \[49–52\]). Firstly, the rapid spread of SARS-CoV-2 between Snohomish and King counties may have been facilitated by the mobility patterns of certain key population groupings, for instance healthcare workers, who are not representative of the population average captured in the cen- sus data. Secondly, while for most of 2020 we observed that model performance was positively
   PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 12 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

correlated with connectivity strength, during the period of most intensive social distancing (April—June), this correlation was inverted. Instead, performance was better at smaller values of the commuting parameter. If non-pharmaceutical interventions resulted in a disproportion- ately large reduction in inter-county transmission compared to intra-county transmission, as was likely the case, this would explain the reversal in model performance. This might also explain the large drops in R res _i_ observed in Kitsap and Thurston counties during this period, the two counties with the lowest per capita hospitalizations. Parameterising models using accu- rate time-varying data on human mobility would help alleviate this issue. Overall, however, our results indicate this second phenomenon was of smaller importance to model performance than the early rapid transmission outlined above. Uncertainty in data quality has proven a challenge to understanding the early spread of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. As we explained above, we chose to perform our inference on time series data of hospitalised cases aged under 60 as they were unaffected by well established time-varying biases, in particular due to test availability issues and improvements in hospital- ized patient outcomes \[53, 54\]. That said, hospitalisation data may be affected by time varying trends in care seeking behaviour (e.g. due to public awareness) or hospital admission criteria (e.g. due to hospital capacity limitations). Unfortunately, we were unable to find documented evidence of the extent and timing of these possible biases. Phylogenetic evidence suggests that, while the Puget sound outbreak was likely seeded from a single introduction, it was unlikely to stem from the initial introduction in Snohomish county \[7\]. Instead, Worobey et al. find that the outbreak was likely sparked by separate unde- tected introduction on February 1 2020 (with a 95% highest posterior density (HPD) of Janu- ary 14 to February 15) \[7\]. Our results are not inconsistent with other introductions sparking the outbreak (η 2 is within the 95% confidence interval, see Fig 3C). After repeating our analysis using an outbreak start date of the week beginning January 26 (S8 and S9 Figs), we find that the maximum log-likelihood of the data post-January 26 is 7.73 log-likelihoods lower compared with using our original start date, the week beginning January 12. Furthermore, η = 0 is outside the 95% confidence interval, implying that the later start date requires a number of additional introductions in order for the epidemic to be large enough to be consistent with the hospitalizations data. In summary, while our results do not necessarily require the outbreak to be seeded by the Snohomish introduction, in order to explain the number of hospitalizations in March and April the epidemiological data favour a putative undetected introduction occur- ring at the beginning of the 95% HPD of Worobey et al. In addition to requiring high spatial connectivity, we also found the outbreaks in both King and Snohomish counties at the start of lockdown were roughly two and three times larger respectively than would be expected from a typical (mean) realization of the best-fit- ting model (see Fig 6). If the outbreak was seeded from a single later introduction in the week of January 26 (see previous paragraph), the same result occurs (S11 Fig). This observed phenomenon is due to demographic stochasticity in the disease transmission process, and suggests that atypically large bursts of transmission occurred in the first couple of weeks. Dynamically, this is a property of stochastic birth-death processes \[55\], of which the early phase of an outbreak is an example. In essence, an outbreak sparked in a population that suc- cessfully avoids dying out is more likely to have spread faster than average—mathematically, if the probability of (local) extinction is P(X _t_ = 0) > 0 then E½X _t_ jX _t> 0 > E½Xt_ . The impact of individual high transmission events on avoiding extinction is more pronounced the earlier in the outbreak they occur, and their occurrence has the effect of “fast-fowarding” the epi- demic, with the resulting epidemic size being larger than would be expected from the mean trajectory.

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 13 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

Forecasting the spread of infectious diseases is increasingly a goal of infectious disease mod- ellers (see e.g. \[56\]). Our findings indicate a pronounced impact of geography and stochasticity on the spread of SARS-CoV-2 which can not be ignored in such efforts—understanding the extent to which observed clusters are shaped by intrinsic similarities between neighbouring counties versus their proximity within the wider spatial transmission network is a pressing topic for further study. Finally, our results demonstrate that accurate prediction of future spread within densely populated urban areas during periods of low incidence is not feasible without, at a minimum, i) modelling approaches capable of accounting for stochastic transmis- sion events and ii) access to zip-code- or neighbourhood-level epidemiological and mobility data.

**Methods**

## Data sources

Throughout the pandemic, the Washington state Department of Public Health has released weekly COVID-19 data, consisting of confirmed cases, new hospitalizations and deaths. Data are disaggregated on the county-level and by age \[57\]. As our study focused on understanding spatial patterns in SARS-CoV-2 transmission, we restricted our analysis to data from the period January 12 2020 (the week of the first confirmed case) to January 30 2021. This end date was chosen to be prior to the introduction of novel VOC and mass vaccination, both of which have a confounding spatially heterogeneous effect on viral transmission. For our likelihood-based inference we used data on the weekly number of new COVID-19 hospitalizations, in order to avoid confounding time-varying trends in confirmed case reports and mortality data (due to the limited initial testing capacity and improvements in treatment respectively). In addition, we excluded hospitalizations in individuals over 60 from the data due to early outbreaks in residential care homes \[6\]. Demographic data on the population size of each Washington county were sourced from the US census \[58\]. Mobility data recording the number of daily commuters between each county in Washington state were also sourced from the US census \[59\]. State-level seropreva- lence estimates of cumulative SARS-CoV-2 infections were periodically made publicly avail- able by the CDC \[42, 43\].

## Clustering analysis

To understand state-wide patterns in SARS-CoV-2 transmission, we performed a clustering analysis on time series data \[60\]. We used county-level confirmed case data, excluding Gar- field, Skamania and Wahkiakum counties (each with population <5000) from the analysis due to insufficient data. In the clustering analysis, we used 1 − ρ as our distance matrix, where ρ is the matrix of pairwise values of Spearman’s ρ calculated from the county-level confirmed case time series. We used hierarchical agglomerative clustering with a maximum linkage criterion to identify clusters of counties \[61\]. The number of clusters present in the data was determined by maximising the silhouette score \[34\]. We repeated our analysis using hospitalization data in place of case counts.

## Transmission model

Statistical inference was performed using a stochastic SEIR-based transmission model that modelled transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in a population of n _c_ counties. As each county had dis- tinct transmission parameters (see below), the curse of dimensionality limited the computa- tional feasibility of our statistical inference to n _c_ = 5\. We chose to focus on the five counties

PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 14 / 22

* * *

**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state

which form the core of the Puget Sound region: King, Pierce, Snohomish, Thurston and Kit- sap. We denote the number of new infections in week \[t, t + 1) among residents of county i by _I_ _i,t+1_. Assuming a 7-day serial interval (consistent with multiple estimates for the original 2020 variant \[2, 62, 63\]), I _i,t+1_ can be modelled using a Poisson distribution, with expectation\
\
## E½Ii;tþ1 ¼ li;tSi;t; ð1Þ\
\
where λ _i,t_ is the force of infection and S _i,t_ is the number of susceptible individuals resident in i at time t. We update S _i,t_ according to the update rule\
\
_S_ _i;tþ1_ ¼ S _i;t Ii;tþ1_ X _tþ1_ ð2Þ ¼ S _i;0 Ii;t0:_ _t0 ¼1_\
\
Due to a lack of evidence to the contrary, we assumed the entire population had no prior immunity against SARS-CoV-2, i.e. that S _i,0_ = N _i_ where N _i_ is the population of county i. The force of infection λ _i,t_ depends on the contact rates of susceptible individuals resident in location i with infectious individuals, and is given by\
\
_nc_ ! X l _i;t_ ¼ x _t_ b _i;j;tIj;t_ þ R res _i_ ðtÞZ=N _i;_ ð3Þ _j¼1_\
\
where η is the average weekly number of SARS-CoV-2 infections imported into the region and _ξ_ _t_ is a zero-mean gamma noise process with standard deviation σSE= 0.126 that accounts for environmental stochasticity in the transmission process \[64\]. The parameter R re _i;ts_ is the resident reproductive number for location i, which we detail below. The tensor element β _i,j,t_ is the transmission rate from infectious individuals in j to susceptible individuals in i at time t,\
\
X _nc_ _Kk;iKk;j_ b _i;j;t_ ¼ _R_ res _k;t_ P _nc;_ ð4Þ _k¼1 ‘¼1_ _Kk;‘N‘_\
\
_K_ _k;KiKk;jN_ where the weight P is determined by the connectivity matrix, whose elements K _i,j_ corre- _‘ k;‘ ‘_ spond to the probability that an individual resident in j is present in i. The denominator P _nc_ _‘¼1Kk;‘N‘corresponds to the mobility-adjusted population size of location k. The sum over k in Eq 4 accounts for the small but non-zero probability that an individual resident in i might encounter an individual resident in j in a third county, k. The connectivity matrix was parame- terised using commuting data, and has the structure 8 T < if i 6¼ j Ni;jjKi;j¼ P ð5Þ : 1nc 1;i6¼j_ _i¼Ki;j_ otherwise;\
\
where T _i,j_ is the number of daily commuters from j to i in the commuting data and the com- muting parameter , which can take values in \[0, 1\], is the proportion of contacts that a com- muter has in their commuting destination. The diagonal elements of the contact matrix account for both the contacts of non-commuting individuals and commuters in their resi- dence location (i.e. while not at work). The resident reproductive number for location i, R res _i;t_, is the expected number of secondary infections caused in a fully susceptible population by a non-commuting individual who lives in i. This parameter varies through time due to the effects of non-pharmaceutical infections,\
\
PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 15 / 22\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state\
\
such as social distancing and mask wearing, and is county-specific to allow for differences in measure implementation and adherence. We model R res _i_ ðtÞ using a set of n _α_ basis functions, _n_ fcmðtÞgma¼1, via the relationship P _na_ resm¼1a _i;mc_ mðtÞð6Þ _Ri_ ðtÞ ¼ R0 _e :_\
\
_n_ The functions c _μ_(t) are in turn defined in terms of a basis of n _α_ \+ 1 cubic B-splines, fbmðtÞgma¼0, which are constructed over the period \[tsd, tend\] where tsdand tendare the start time of social distancing and the end time of the time series respectively (see \[65\]). Explicitly, we define ( _b_ ðt Þb ðtÞ _b_ m ðtÞ m _b0 ðtsdÞ_ sd 0 if t tsd _c_ m ðtÞ ¼ ð7Þ 0 otherwise:\
\
This definition ensures that: i) R res _i_ ðtÞ ¼ R0 for t < tsdand ii) R re _i_ s ðtÞ is a continuous function of time regardless of α _i,μ_ and b _μ_(t) (as can be seen by sending t ! tsdfrom above in Eq 7). We fix the start of social distancing as tsd= 7, corresponding to the week beginning March 1 2020 (the first week after the discovery of community transmission) and, based on preliminary investiga- tion, used a basis of n _α_ = 8 functions. Commuters experience a reduction in contact rates through social distancing in both their resident and commuting location (see Eq 4). In what follows, we use hospitalizations to exclusively refer to those under 60, i.e. the subset we are fitting to. We assumed that the number of weekly infections in each location that are under 60 and require hospitalization, H _i,t_, followed an overdispersed normal distribution \[64\], with probability density function f ðm _i;t; s2i;t_ Þ specified in terms of the mean and variance. Due to the typical delay between infection and hospitalization, infections were lagged by one week in our hospitalizations model. The mean and variance in the number of weekly hospitaliza- tions in location i at time t are given by,\
\
## mi;t¼ rIi;t 1; ð8Þ\
\
s2 _i;t_ ¼ m _i;t_ ð1 r þ c2 _Ii;t_ 1Þ; ð9Þ\
\
with ρ the probability a case in under 60 and hospitalized and ψ the overdispersion parameter. _n_ _c 1_ Together, Eqs 1–9 define a discrete time Markov process with state X _t_ ¼ fS _i;t; Ii;t; Hi;t_ g _i¼_ at time t.\
\
## Statistical inference\
\
Statistical inference was performed on T = 56 weeks of hospitalizations data from n _c_ = 5 coun- _n ;T_ _c 1;t¼1_ ties, fH _i;t_ g _i¼_. The likelihood function for the observed data given the model parameters Θ, _T_ denoted ℓ(Θ), is found by marginalizing the probability of a trajectory fX _t_ g _t¼1_ over the unob- served state variables,\
\
_nc_ ! X X Y _T_ Y _‘ðYÞ_ ¼... _PðHi;t_ jI _i;t_ 1\*; YÞ PðIt; St _jI_ t\* 1\*; St\* 1\*; YÞ\* **I1;S1 IT;ST** _t¼1 i¼1_ _nc_ ! X X Y _T_ Y ¼... _f ðHi;t_; m _i;t; s2i;t_ Þ _PðIt; St_ jI _t_ 1\*; St\* 1\*; YÞ\* ð10Þ **I1;S1 IT;ST** _t¼1 i¼1_ " _n_ # Y _T_ Y _c_ ¼ E _f ðHi;t_; m _i;t; s2i;t_ Þ I0\*; S0; Y;\* _t¼1 i¼1_\
\
PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 16 / 22\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state\
\
where f ðH _i;t_; m _i;t; s2i;t_ Þ is the probability density function of the normal distribution specified by Eqs 8 and 9. If the populations are disconnected ( = 0) then the transmission processes in each location are mutually independent and the likelihood function factorizes, Q _n_ _c 1_ _‘ðYÞ ¼i¼‘i_ ðYÞ, with the likelihood in location i given by " # Y _T_ _‘_ _i_ ðYÞ ¼ E _f ðHi;t_; m _i;t; s2i;t_ Þ I _i;0; Si;0; Y :_ ð11Þ _t¼1_\
\
The structure of our model makes Eqs 10 and 11 analytically intractable, and solving either of them requires using Monte Carlo methods, i.e. repeatedly simulating from the transmission model Eqs 1–7. To perform this sampling efficiently we used particle filtering, see \[33, 66\]. Due to a lack of compelling evidence for pre-2020 immunity to SARS-CoV-2 infection, we assumed the population was initially fully susceptible with one infectious individual in Sno- homish county in the week of January 12 (the week and location of the first identified case in Washington state). This infection was not necessarily the ancestor of all subsequent infections as our model allowed for introductions in the force of infection (see Eq 3). Statistical inference to find maximum likelihood estimates for unknown model parameters was performed using data from five counties in the Puget Sound region: King, Pierce, Sno- homish, Thurston and Kitsap. In total, our model had 44 unknown parameters: 4 region-wide parameters and 8 × 5 county-specific basis function coefficients. Given the high-dimensional- ity of the search space, we used a hybrid scheme to maximise the likelihood. Maximisation over the four region-wide parameters was performed via a grid search. At each grid point, the region-wide parameters were set to their grid point values and the likeli- hood was maximised over the remaining 40 basis function parameters. To ensure convergence we replicated the estimation 27 times with different initial parameter guesses. Initial guesses for each basis function coefficient α _i,μ_ within each replicate were generated using latin-hyper- cube sampling over the interval \[−3, 3\] (substantially larger than any final estimated values, based on preliminary studies). Likelihood maximisation was then achieved in two stages, both using the iterated filtering algorithm implemented in the mif2 function of the R package “pomp” \[32, 33\]: _n_\
\
1. To refine our initial guesses for fa _i;m_ gma¼1, iterated filtering was run for each county sepa- rately, assuming no spatial connectivity (i.e. = 0, see Eq 11). For this first run we used the following iterated filtering hyperparameters: 2000 particles, 50 iterations, a cooling fraction of 0.8 and a random walk standard deviation of σRW= 0.05.\
2. The estimates from the first run were used to initialize for a second iterated filtering search with the full connected model (i.e. with at its grid point value, Eq 10), which used the same hyperparameters apart from a smaller random walk σRW= 0.01. This second search returned estimates of the basis function coefficients which maximise the likelihood at each grid point. Using these estimated basis function coefficients, we then calculated the maximimum likeli- hood at each grid point via particle filtering, again using 2000 particles. Finally, the MLE for all model parameters we found by maximising the resulting likelihood surface over the entire grid. Confidence intervals on the global parameters were constructed in a similar way: For each value of the parameter of interest, the profile likelihood was calculated by maximising the likelihood surface over all the other grid dimensions. Statistical significance was then quanti- fied using a likelihood-ratio test and the application of Wilks’ theorem, with results shown at the 95% confidence level.\
   PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 17 / 22\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state\
\
## Supporting information\
\
## S1 Fig. Time series of weekly confirmed SARS-CoV-2 cases per 10\
\
**5** **by Washington state** **county (Adams–Lewis).** (TIFF)\
\
## S2 Fig. Time series of weekly confirmed SARS-CoV-2 cases per 10\
\
**5** **by Washington state** **county (Lincoln–Yakima).** (TIFF)\
\
## S3 Fig. Silhouette score for the agglomerative clustering analysis.\
\
(TIFF)\
\
## S4 Fig. Repeat of the agglomerative clustering analysis using time series data of weekly\
\
## COVID-19 hospitalizations. Maps makes use of TIGER/Line Shapefiles from the U.S. Census\
\
Bureau which are in the public doman ( [https://www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files](https://www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files). html). (TIFF)\
\
## S5 Fig. Silhouette score for the agglomerative clustering analysis using hospitalizations\
\
**data.** (TIFF)\
\
## S6 Fig. Analysis of age-structured epidemiological data. A) Weekly confirmed cases by age\
\
group B) Weekly age-specific confirmed cases relative to cases aged 20–39 y.o. C) Weekly new hospitalisations by age group D) Weekly age-specific new hospitalizations relative to hospitali- zations aged 20–39 y.o. (TIFF)\
\
## S7 Fig. Heat map of the likelihood surface after maximising over the basis function param-\
\
**eters. The local maximum in each panel is indicated by a black dot, with the global maximum** highlighted in yellow. (TIFF)\
\
## S8 Fig. Heat map of the likelihood surface found by performing the inference using differ-\
\
## ent initial conditions. Instead of initialising the outbreak with one infection in Snohomish\
\
county in the week beginning January 12, the outbreak simulations were initialised with one infection in King county in the week of January 26 2020. The local maximum in each panel is indicated by a black dot, with the global maximum highlighted in yellow. (TIFF)\
\
## S9 Fig. Reproduction of Fig 3 using the likelihood surface in S8 Fig.\
\
(TIFF)\
\
## S10 Fig. Early epidemic take-off in Clark, Spokane and Thurston counties.\
\
(TIFF)\
\
## S11 Fig. Comparison of simulated trajectories with observed data using a later initial\
\
**introduction time. As with the results shown in S8 and S9 Figs, the outbreak was initialised** with one infection in King county in the week of January 26 2020. Parameters used were those that maximised the log-likelihood (shown in S8 Fig) subject to η = 0, i.e. ensuring that the out- break was seeded from a single introduction. (TIFF)\
\
PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 18 / 22\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S UC TO AM T PI OB NI OAL LO G Y** Charting the spatial dynamics of early SARS-CoV-2 transmission in Washington state\
\
## Author Contributions\
\
## Conceptualization: Tobias S. Brett, Shweta Bansal, Pejman Rohani.\
\
## Data curation: Tobias S. Brett.\
\
## Funding acquisition: Shweta Bansal, Pejman Rohani.\
\
## Investigation: Tobias S. Brett.\
\
## Methodology: Tobias S. Brett, Pejman Rohani.\
\
## Project administration: Shweta Bansal, Pejman Rohani.\
\
## Software: Tobias S. Brett.\
\
## Supervision: Shweta Bansal, Pejman Rohani.\
\
## Validation: Tobias S. Brett.\
\
## Visualization: Tobias S. Brett.\
\
## Writing – original draft: Tobias S. Brett.\
\
## Writing – review & editing: Tobias S. Brett, Shweta Bansal, Pejman Rohani.\
\
**References**\
\
**1.** Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J, et al. A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumo- nia in China, 2019. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;. [https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2001017](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2001017) PMID: 31978945\
**2.** Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia. New England journal of medicine. 2020;. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10). 1056/NEJMoa2001316 PMID: 31995857\
**3.** Chinazzi M, Davis JT, Ajelli M, Gioannini C, Litvinova M, Merler S, et al. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science. 2020; 368(6489):395–400. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba9757](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba9757) PMID: 32144116\
**4.** Holshue ML, DeBolt C, Lindquist S, Lofy KH, Wiesman J, Bruce H, et al. First case of 2019 novel coro- navirus in the United States. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;. [https://doi.org/10.1056/](https://doi.org/10.1056/) NEJMoa2001191\
**5.** Burke RM, Midgley CM, Dratch A, Fenstersheib M, Haupt T, Holshue M, et al. Active monitoring of per- sons exposed to patients with confirmed COVID-19—United States, January–February 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 2020; 69(9):245. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6909e1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6909e1) PMID: 32134909\
**6.** McMichael TM, Clark S, Pogosjans S, Kay M, Lewis J, Baer A, et al. COVID-19 in a long-term care facil- ity—King County, Washington, February 27–March 9, 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 2020; 69(12):339. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6912e1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6912e1) PMID: 32214083\
**7.** Worobey M, Pekar J, Larsen BB, Nelson MI, Hill V, Joy JB, et al. The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in Europe and North America. Science. 2020; 370(6516):564–570. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science](https://doi.org/10.1126/science). abc8169 PMID: 32912998\
**8.** Bedford T, Greninger AL, Roychoudhury P, Starita LM, Famulare M, Huang ML, et al. Cryptic transmis- sion of SARS-CoV-2 in Washington state. Science. 2020; 370(6516):571–575. [https://doi.org/10.1126/](https://doi.org/10.1126/) science.abc0523 PMID: 32913002\
**9.** Hallas L, Hatibie A, Majumdar S, Pyarali M, Koch R, Wood A, et al. Variation in US states’ responses to COVID-19\_3.0; 2020. Available from: [https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/publications/variation-us-](https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/publications/variation-us-) states-responses-covid-19.\
**10.** Cummings DA, Irizarry RA, Huang NE, Endy TP, Nisalak A, Ungchusak K, et al. Travelling waves in the occurrence of dengue haemorrhagic fever in Thailand. Nature. 2004; 427(6972):344–347. [https://doi](https://doi/). org/10.1038/nature02225 PMID: 14737166\
**11.** Rohani P, Earn DJ, Grenfell BT. Opposite patterns of synchrony in sympatric disease metapopulations. Science. 1999; 286(5441):968–971. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5441.968](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5441.968) PMID: 10542154\
**12.** Choisy M, Rohani P. Changing spatial epidemiology of pertussis in continental USA. Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 2012; 279:4574–4581. [https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2012.1761](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2012.1761) PMID: 23015623\
PLOS Computational Biology \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011263) June 28, 2023 19 / 22\
\
* * *\
\
13. Saeidpour A, Bansal S, Rohani P. Dissecting recurrent waves of pertussis across the boroughs of London. PLOS Computational Biology. 2022; 18(4):e1009898. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi).\
    1009898 PMID: 35421101\
14. Grenfell BT, Bjørnstad ON, Kappey J. Travelling waves and spatial hierarchies in measles epidemics.\
    Nature. 2001; 414(6865):716–723. [https://doi.org/10.1038/414716a](https://doi.org/10.1038/414716a) PMID: 11742391\
15. Viboud C, Bjørnstad ON, Smith DL, Simonsen L, Miller MA, Grenfell BT. Synchrony, waves, and spatial\
    hierarchies in the spread of influenza. Science. 2006; 312(5772):447–451. [https://doi.org/10.1126/](https://doi.org/10.1126/)\
    science.1125237 PMID: 16574822\
16. Alonso WJ, Viboud C, Simonsen L, Hirano EW, Daufenbach LZ, Miller MA. Seasonality of Influenza in\
    Brazil: A Traveling Wave from the Amazon to the Subtropics. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2007;\
    165(12):1434–1442. [https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwm012](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwm012) PMID: 17369609\
17. Martinez-Bakker M, King AA, Rohani P. Unraveling the Transmission Ecology of Polio. PLoS Biol.\
    2015; 13(6):e1002172. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002172](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002172) PMID: 26090784\
18. Pons-Salort M, Oberste MS, Pallansch MA, Abedi GR, Takahashi S, Grenfell BT, et al. The seasonality\
    of nonpolio enteroviruses in the United States: Patterns and drivers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2018;Vol 2:201721159. [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas).\
    1721159115 PMID: 29507246\
19. Sonabend R, Whittles LK, Imai N, Perez-Guzman PN, Knock ES, Rawson T, et al. Non-pharmaceutical\
    interventions, vaccination, and the SARS-CoV-2 delta variant in England: a mathematical modelling\
    study. The Lancet. 2021; 398(10313):1825–1835. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02276-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02276-5)\
20. Li R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W, et al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the\
    rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). Science. 2020; 368(6490):489–493. https://\
    doi.org/10.1126/science.abb3221 PMID: 32179701\
21. Yang W, Kandula S, Huynh M, Greene SK, Van Wye G, Li W, et al. Estimating the infection-fatality risk\
    of SARS-CoV-2 in New York City during the spring 2020 pandemic wave: a model-based analysis. The\
    Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2021; 21(2):203–212. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30769-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30769-6)\
    PMID: 33091374\
22. Kraemer MU, Hill V, Ruis C, Dellicour S, Bajaj S, McCrone JT, et al. Spatiotemporal invasion dynamics\
    of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B. 1.1. 7 emergence. Science. 2021; 373(6557):889–895. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).\
    1126/science.abj0113 PMID: 34301854\
23. Volz E, Mishra S, Chand M, Barrett JC, Johnson R, Geidelberg L, et al. Assessing transmissibility of\
    SARS-CoV-2 lineage B. 1.1. 7 in England. Nature. 2021; 593(7858):266–269. [https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/)\
    s41586-021-03470-x PMID: 33767447\
24. Campbell F, Archer B, Laurenson-Schafer H, Jinnai Y, Konings F, Batra N, et al. Increased transmissibility and global spread of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern as at June 2021. Eurosurveillance.\
    2021; 26(24):2100509. [https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.24.2100509](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.24.2100509) PMID:\
    34142653\
25. Grenfell BT, Bjornstad ON, Kappey J. Travelling waves and spatial hierarchies in measles epidemics.\
    Nature. 2001; 414(6865):716–723. [https://doi.org/10.1038/414716a](https://doi.org/10.1038/414716a) PMID: 11742391\
26. Colizza V, Vespignani A. Epidemic modeling in metapopulation systems with heterogeneous coupling\
    pattern: Theory and simulations. Journal of Theoretical Biology. 2008; 251(3):450–467. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)\
    10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.11.028 PMID: 18222487\
27. Kraemer MUG, Yang CH, Gutierrez B, Wu CH, Klein B, Pigott DM, et al. The effect of human mobility\
    and control measures on the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science. 2020; 368(6490):493–497. https://\
    doi.org/10.1126/science.abb4218 PMID: 32213647\
28. Pitzer VE, Viboud C, Simonsen L, Steiner C, Panozzo CA, Alonso WJ, et al. Demographic Variability,\
    Vaccination, and the Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Rotavirus Epidemics. Science. 2009; 325\
    (5938):290–294. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1172330](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1172330) PMID: 19608910\
29. Martinez-Bakker M, Bakker KM, King AA, Rohani P. Human birth seasonality: latitudinal gradient and\
    interplay with childhood disease dynamics. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences.\
    2014; 281(1783):1573–1578. [https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2013.2438](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2013.2438) PMID: 24695423\
30. Eyre DW, Taylor D, Purver M, Chapman D, Fowler T, Pouwels KB, et al. Effect of Covid-19 Vaccination\
    on Transmission of Alpha and Delta Variants. New England Journal of Medicine. 2022; 386(8):744–\
31. [https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2116597](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2116597) PMID: 34986294\
32. Shaman J, Pitzer VE, Viboud C, Grenfell BT, Lipsitch M. Absolute humidity and the seasonal onset of\
    influenza in the continental United States. PLoS Biol. 2010; 8(2):e1000316. [https://doi.org/10.1371/](https://doi.org/10.1371/)\
    journal.pbio.1000316 PMID: 20186267\
33. Ionides EL, Bhadra A, Atchade´ Y, King AA. Iterated filtering. Ann Stat. 2011; 39:1776–1802. [https://doi](https://doi/).\
    org/10.1214/11-AOS886\
\
* * *\
\
33. King AA, Nguyen D, Ionides EL. Statistical Inference for Partially Observed Markov Processes via the R\
    Package pomp. Journal of Statistical Software. 2016; 69(i12).\
34. Rousseeuw PJ. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. Journal of computational and applied mathematics. 1987; 20:53–65. [https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(87)](https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(87))\
    90125-7\
35. Mu¨ ller NF, Wagner C, Frazar CD, Roychoudhury P, Lee J, Moncla LH, et al. Viral genomes reveal patterns of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in Washington State. Science Translational Medicine. 2021; 13\
    (595):eabf0202. [https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abf0202](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abf0202) PMID: 33941621\
36. Wilks SS. The large-sample distribution of the likelihood ratio for testing composite hypotheses. The\
    Annals of Mathematical Statistics. 1938; 9(1):60–62. [https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177732360](https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177732360)\
37. van Kampen NG. Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry. Elsevier; 1992.\
38. Davis JT, Chinazzi M, Perra N, Mu K, Pastore y Piontti A, Ajelli M, et al. Cryptic transmission of SARS-\
    CoV-2 and the first COVID-19 wave. Nature. 2021; 600(7887):127–132. [https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/)\
    s41586-021-04130-w PMID: 34695837\
39. Pei S, Yamana TK, Kandula S, Galanti M, Shaman J. Burden and characteristics of COVID-19 in the\
    United States during 2020. Nature. 2021; 598(7880):338–341. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-)\
    03914-4 PMID: 34438440\
40. Reese H, Iuliano AD, Patel NN, Garg S, Kim L, Silk BJ, et al. Estimated incidence of coronavirus disease\
    2019 (COVID-19) illness and hospitalization—United States, February–September 2020. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2021; 72(12):e1010–e1017. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1780](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1780) PMID: 33237993\
41. Wu SL, Mertens AN, Crider YS, Nguyen A, Pokpongkiat NN, Djajadi S, et al. Substantial underestimation of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the United States. Nature communications. 2020; 11(1):4507. https://\
    doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18272-4 PMID: 32908126\
42. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and others. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention COVID Data Tracker; 2022.\
43. Bajema KL, Wiegand RE, Cuffe K, Patel SV, Iachan R, Lim T, et al. Estimated SARS-CoV-2 Seroprevalence in the US as of September 2020. JAMA Internal Medicine. 2021; 181(4):450–460. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)\
    10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.7976 PMID: 33231628\
44. Choisy M, Rohani P. Changing spatial epidemiology of pertussis in continental USA. Proceedings of the\
    Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 2012; 279(1747):4574–4581. [https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2012](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2012).\
    1761 PMID: 23015623\
45. Susswein Z, Rest EC, Bansal S. Disentangling the rhythms of human activity in the built environment\
    for airborne transmission risk. medRxiv. 2022;.\
46. Kissler SM, Tedijanto C, Goldstein E, Grad YH, Lipsitch M. Projecting the transmission dynamics of\
    SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science. 2020; 368(6493):860–868. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).\
    1126/science.abb5793 PMID: 32291278\
47. Kronfeld-Schor N, Stevenson TJ, Nickbakhsh S, Schernhammer ES, Dopico XC, Dayan T, et al. Drivers\
    of infectious disease seasonality: potential implications for COVID-19. Journal of biological rhythms.\
    2021; 36(1):35–54. [https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730420987322](https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730420987322) PMID: 33491541\
48. Baker RE, Yang W, Vecchi GA, Metcalf CJE, Grenfell BT. Susceptible supply limits the role of climate in\
    the early SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Science. 2020; 369(6501):315–319. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science](https://doi.org/10.1126/science).\
    abc2535 PMID: 32423996\
49. Pei S, Kandula S, Yang W, Shaman J. Forecasting the spatial transmission of influenza in the United\
    States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2018; 115(11):2752–2757. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)\
    10.1073/pnas.1708856115 PMID: 29483256\
50. Charu V, Zeger S, Gog J, Bjørnstad ON, Kissler S, Simonsen L, et al. Human mobility and the spatial\
    transmission of influenza in the United States. PLoS Computational Biology. 2017; 13(2):e1005382.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005382](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005382) PMID: 28187123\
51. Balcan D, Colizza V, Gonc¸alves B, Hu H, Ramasco JJ, Vespignani A. Multiscale mobility networks and\
    the spatial spreading of infectious diseases. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2009;\
    106(51):21484–21489. [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0906910106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0906910106) PMID: 20018697\
52. Riley S, Ferguson NM. Smallpox transmission and control: spatial dynamics in Great Britain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2006; 103(33):12637–12642. [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas).\
    0510873103 PMID: 16894173\
53. Horwitz LI, Jones SA, Cerfolio RJ, Francois F, Greco J, Rudy B, et al. Trends in COVID-19 risk-adjusted\
    mortality rates. Journal of Hospital Medicine. 2021; 16(2):90–92. [https://doi.org/10.12788/jhm.3552](https://doi.org/10.12788/jhm.3552)\
    PMID: 33147129\
54. Lefrancq N, Paireau J, Hoze´ N, Courtejoie N, Yazdanpanah Y, Bouadma L, et al. Evolution of outcomes\
    for patients hospitalised during the first 9 months of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in France: A retrospective national surveillance data analysis. The Lancet Regional Health-Europe. 2021; 5:100087.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2021.100087](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2021.100087) PMID: 34104903\
55. Bailey NT. The Elements of Stochastic Processes with Applications to the Natural Sciences. John\
    Wiley & Sons; 1991.\
56. Borchering RK, Viboud C, Howerton E, Smith CP, Truelove S, Runge MC, et al. Modeling of future\
    COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths, by vaccination rates and nonpharmaceutical intervention scenarios—United States, April–September 2021. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 2021; 70\
    (19):719. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7019e3](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7019e3) PMID: 33988185\
57. Washington State Department of Health. COVID-19 Data Dashboard; 2022. Available from: [https://doh](https://doh/).\
    wa.gov/emergencies/covid-19/data-dashboard#downloads.\
58. US Census Bureau. County Population Totals: 2010-2019; 2020. Available from: [https://www.census](https://www.census/).\
    gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-counties-total.html.\
59. US Census Bureau. 2011-2015 5-Year ACS Commuting Flows; 2021. Available from: [https://www](https://www/).\
    census.gov/data/tables/2015/demo/metro-micro/commuting-flows-2015.html.\
60. Serra J, Arcos JL. An empirical evaluation of similarity measures for time series classification. Knowledge-Based Systems. 2014; 67:305–314. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2014.04.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2014.04.035)\
61. Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. The Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer series in statistics\
    New York, NY, USA; 2001.\
62. Zhang J, Litvinova M, Wang W, Wang Y, Deng X, Chen X, et al. Evolving epidemiology and transmission dynamics of coronavirus disease 2019 outside Hubei province, China: a descriptive and modelling\
    study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020;. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30230-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30230-9)\
63. Park SW, Bolker BM, Champredon D, Earn DJ, Li M, Weitz JS, et al. Reconciling early-outbreak estimates of the basic reproductive number and its uncertainty: framework and applications to the novel\
    coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) outbreak. Journal of the Royal Society Interface. 2020; 17(168):20200144.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.0144](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.0144) PMID: 32693748\
64. He D, Ionides EL, King AA. Plug-and-play inference for disease dynamics: measles in large and small\
    populations as a case study. Journal of the Royal Society Interface. 2010; 7(43):271–283. [https://doi](https://doi/).\
    org/10.1098/rsif.2009.0151 PMID: 19535416\
65. Breto´ C, He D, Ionides EL, King AA. Time series analysis via mechanistic models. The Annals of\
    Applied Statistics. 2009; p. 319–348.\
66. Doucet A, De Freitas N, Gordon NJ, et al. Sequential Monte Carlo methods in practice. vol. 1. Springer;