A Comparative Analysis of Influenza
Vaccination Programs

Shweta Bansal1, Babak Pourbohloul2, Lauren Ancel Meyers3,4\*

1 Computational and Applied Mathematics, University of Texas Austin, Austin, Texas, United States of America, 2 UBC Centre for Disease Control, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, 3 Section of Integrative Biology and Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Austin, Austin, Texas,
United States of America, 4 External Faculty, Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, New Mexico, United States of America

Funding: We acknowledge the
financial support of the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research, the
Santa Fe Institute, and a NASA
Harriett G. Jenkins Fellowship to SB.
The funding agencies had no role in
study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.

Competing Interests: The authors
have declared that no competing
interests exist.

Academic Editor: Bryan Grenfell,
Pennsylvania State University,
United States of America

Citation: Bansal S, Pourbohloul B,
Meyers LA (2006) A comparative
analysis of influenza vaccination
programs. PLoS Med 3(10): e387.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387

Received: October 13, 2005
Accepted: July 13, 2006
Published: October 3, 2006

Received: October 13, 2005
Accepted: July 13, 2006

Accepted: July 13, 2006
Published: October 3, 2006

DOI:
10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387

Copyright: 2006 Bansal et al. This
is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original
author and source are credited.
Abbreviations: CDC, United States

Abbreviations: CDC, United States
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention

ABSTRACT

The threat of avian influenza and the 2004–2005 influenza vaccine supply shortage in the
United States have sparked a debate about optimal vaccination strategies to reduce the burden
of morbidity and mortality caused by the influenza virus.

Methods and Findings

We present a comparative analysis of two classes of suggested vaccination strategies:
mortality-based strategies that target high-risk populations and morbidity-based strategies that
target high-prevalence populations. Applying the methods of contact network epidemiology
to a model of disease transmission in a large urban population, we assume that vaccine
supplies are limited and then evaluate the efficacy of these strategies across a wide range of
viral transmission rates and for two different age-specific mortality distributions.
We find that the optimal strategy depends critically on the viral transmission level

We find that the optimal strategy depends critically on the viral transmission level
(reproductive rate) of the virus: morbidity-based strategies outperform mortality-based
strategies for moderately transmissible strains, while the reverse is true for highly transmissible
strains. These results hold for a range of mortality rates reported for prior influenza epidemics
and pandemics. Furthermore, we show that vaccination delays and multiple introductions of
disease into the community have a more detrimental impact on morbidity-based strategies
than mortality-based strategies.

Conclusions

If public health officials have reasonable estimates of the viral transmission rate and the
frequency of new introductions into the community prior to an outbreak, then these methods
can guide the design of optimal vaccination priorities. When such information is unreliable or
not available, as is often the case, this study recommends mortality-based vaccination priorities.

The Editors’ Summary of this article follows the references.

* * *

Introduction

In response to the 2004–2005 influenza vaccine shortage,
the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) restricted vaccines to those most at risk for hospitalization and death — healthy infants, elderly individuals, and
individuals with chronic illnesses. This strategy may be limited
by the failure of vaccines to yield adequate protection for
high-risk individuals \[1,2\] and the lesser roles played by infants
and the elderly in disease transmission—they typically do not
introduce influenza into households or other social groups.
Influenza outbreaks are believed to hinge, instead, on

introduce influenza into households or other social groups.
Influenza outbreaks are believed
transmission by healthy school
students, and employed adults who have many daily contacts
and are highly mobile \[7\].
suggested an alternative approach:
children to slow the spread of disease and thereby indirectly
decrease mortality \[8,9\]. Several studies support this strategy.
Monto et al. immunized school
Michigan, with inactivated influenza
found lower total morbidity than in a matching community
during a wave of influenza A (H3N2) \[10\]. Reichart et al. argue
that mandatory influenza vaccination of school children in
Japan from 1962 to 1987 reduced incidence and mortality
among the elderly \[11\]. Recently,
mathematical models to show that, under
tions, vaccinating 80% of all school-age children is almost as
effective as vaccinating 80%
School-based vaccination programs
benefits of high coverage, high
effects \[12\].
In a similar spirit, others

introduce influenza into households or other social groups.
believed to hinge, instead, on
school children \[3–6\], college
students, and employed adults who have many daily contacts
\[7\]. Thus, epidemiologists have
approach: vaccinate school-age
children to slow the spread of disease and thereby indirectly
decrease mortality \[8,9\]. Several studies support this strategy.
school children in Tecumseh,
influenza vaccine in 1968 and
found lower total morbidity than in a matching community
during a wave of influenza A (H3N2) \[10\]. Reichart et al. argue
that mandatory influenza vaccination of school children in
Japan from 1962 to 1987 reduced incidence and mortality
Recently, Longini et al. used
mathematical models to show that, under certain assumptions, vaccinating 80% of all school-age children is almost as
80% of the entire population \[8\].
programs have the additional
high efficacy, and minimal side
have suggested contact-based

In a similar spirit, others have suggested contact-based
priorities that target individuals with the highest numbers of
potentially disease-causing contacts \[13–15\]. This assumes
that vulnerability is directly proportional to the number of
contacts, and that removing the most vulnerable individuals
from the transmission chain will maximally decrease disease

A

spread. Identifying high-contact individuals in a community,
however, may be difficult in practice.
Here we apply tools from contact network epidemiology

Figure 1. Network Model
(A) A schematic of a network model for an urban population. Each individual is a vertex in the network, and edges represent potentially disease-causing

however, may be difficult in practice.
Here we apply tools from contact network epidemiology
\[16–19\] to evaluate vaccination strategies for a spectrum of
influenza strains when vaccine supplies are limited. We use a
realistic model of contact patterns in an urban setting to
compare mortality-based strategies that target high-risk
individuals to morbidity-based strategies that target demographics with high attack rates. We assess the efficacy of these
measures for two substantially different virulence patterns,
one based on mortality estimates from annual influenza
epidemics and the other based on mortality estimates from
the 1918 influenza pandemic. In addition, we consider the
impact of vaccination delay and multiple imported cases on
the relative effectiveness of the vaccination strategies.

Population Model
We built a contact

Methods

Population Model
We built a contact network model that captures the
interactions that underlie respiratory disease transmission
within a city. The model is based on demographic information for Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. In the model,
each person is represented as a vertex, and interactions
between people are represented as edges between appropriate vertices. Each person is assigned an age based on
Vancouver census data, and age-appropriate activities
(school, work, hospital, etc.). Interactions among individuals
reflect household size, employment, school, and hospital data
for Vancouver. The model population includes;257,000
individuals. For further details and sensitivity analysis, see
Protocol S1 and Figures S1 and S2.
Our contact network model contains undirected edges that

Our contact network model contains undirected edges that
reflect the possibility of diseasetransmissionineither
direction between two individuals, and directed edges that
indicate the possibility of disease transmission from one
person to another, but not the reverse (see Figure 1). Directed

(A) A schematic of a network model for an urban population. Each individual is a vertex in the network, and edges represent potentially disease-causing
contacts between individuals. Directed edges (with arrows) represent transmission occurring in only one direction.
(B) We model vaccination in a population by removing nodes from the population network, and the edges that are attached to them.
HCW, health-care worker.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g001

HCW, health-care worker.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g001

B

* * *

Table 1. The Age-Specific Mortality Distributions for Typical Annual Influenza Epidemics and an Example Influenza Pandemic

| Group | Mortality Rate for Influenza Epidemic(per 10,000 Cases) | Mortality Rate for Influenza Pandemic(per 10,000 Cases) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Infants and toddlers(6mo-3y) | 0.30 | 80.0 |
| Preschool children(3-5y) | 0.08 | 50.0 |
| Children(5-18y) | 0.08 | 20.0 |
| Adults(18-50y) | 0.07 | 70.0 |
| Elders(>50y) | 12.00 | 5.0 |

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.t001

edges model the possibility of transmission from an infected
member of the general public to health-care workers during
hospital visits. In a typical epidemic, most individuals infected
with influenza do not seek hospital care. We assume that only
high-risk groups (infants and elderly) visit hospitals upon
infection and thus have opportunities to infect the health-care
workers who treat them \[20\]. We also consider a more extreme
scenario in which almost all infected individuals are at risk for
serious complications and thus seek medical care upon
infection.

Influenza Mortality
Mortality rates differ both across demographic groups and

Influenza Mortality
Mortality rates differ both across demographic groups and
among strains of influenza (see Table 1 and Protocol S1), and
thus the optimal vaccination priorities are likely to depend
on the virulence of the circulating strains. We consider two
substantially different mortality models. The first assumes
age-specific mortality rates typical of interpandemic outbreaks of flu, which are based on national viral surveillance
data reported for 1977–1999 \[21\]. The rate is highest for the
elderly, followed by infants, who are most at risk for death
caused directly by influenza or pneumonia or by primary
respiratory or circulatory complications. The second model,
which was intentionally chosen for contrast, assumes mortality rates to be as estimated for the 1918 flu pandemic. These
are high for healthy young adults aged 20–40 y and children
under 5 y and low for older children and the elderly \[22\]
(Table 1). There are, however, conflicting estimates for the
elderly \[23,24\]. We use a low estimate to achieve the greatest
departure from the interpandemic model, and thus to
ascertain the sensitivity of our results to assumptions about

influenza mortality. Henceforth, we refer to these two models
as interpandemic and pandemic, respectively. We consider
other reported mortality rates in Protocol S1 and Figure S3.

Vaccine Priorities
We modeled targeted pre-season vaccination with single
doses of inactivated influenza vaccine by removing select
individuals (vertices) and all their contacts (edges) from the
network before predicting the spread of influenza (see Figure
1). The fraction of the vaccinated population that becomes
fully protected is based on demographic-specific vaccine
efficacy estimates (Table 2). For a vaccine of efficacy E and
coverage C for a particular group, we remove a fraction C E of
individuals from that group. This assumes that this fraction is
fully protected (100% effectiveness) while the remaining
fraction C (1 E) of vaccinated individuals are not protected
at all. In reality, most of the vaccinated individuals will enjoy
some partial protection. We have tested our method with
simulations to confirm that it provides a reasonable model
for partial efficacy (see Protocol S1 and Figure S5).
We evaluate four strategies (Figure 2): (1) a mortality-based

Vaccine Priorities
We modeled targeted pre-season vaccination with single

{\\boldsymbol{\\cdot}}{\\boldsymbol{C}}({\\boldsymbol{1}}-{\\boldsymbol{E}}

We evaluate four strategies (Figure 2): (1) a mortality-based
strategy that, like the recent CDC strategy, targets demographics that are most vulnerable to health complications or
death (infants, the elderly, and health-care workers for
interpandemic flu; and infants, adults, and health-care
workers for pandemic flu); (2) a morbidity-based strategy,
similar to the priorities suggested by Longini et al \[8\] and
Monto et al.\[10\], that targets school-aged children and school
staff, and thereby aims to reduce mortality through herd
protection \[25\]; (3) a mixed strategy that targets demographics with high attack rates (children) and high mortality

Sources: \[12,26\].
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.t002

| Group | Vaccination Coverage Levels | Inactivated Vaccine Efficacy |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Infants and toddlers(6mo-3y) | 30%-75% | 70%-90% |
| Preschool children(3-5y) | 30%-75% | 70%-90% |
| Children(5-18y) | 30%-75% | 77%-91% |
| Adults(18-50y) | 30%-75% | 70%-90% |
| Elders(>50y) | 67%-85% | 30%-50% |
| Health-care workers | 25%-38% | 70%-90% |
| Elders in care facilities | 90%-95% | 30%-50% |

Sources: \[12,26\].
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.t002

* * *

Figure 2. Vaccination Strategies
The demographic distribution of vaccines according to each of the strategies: the black bars reflect the fraction of available vaccines given to each age

The demographic distribution of vaccines according to each of the strategies: the black bars reflect the fraction of available vaccines given to each age
group (and thus will always sum to one). The gray bars reflect the proportion of each demographic that is effectively immunized, and thus take into
account the size of the demographic and the demographic-specific vaccine efficacy.
HCW, health-care worker.

HCW, health-care worker.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g002

HCW, health-care worker.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g002

rates (infants and the elderly for interpandemic flu; infants
and adults for pandemic flu), similar to that suggested by
Longini and Halloran \[9\]; and (4) a contact-based strategy
that removes a fraction of the most connected individuals.
We modeled the mortality-based strategy by removing

We modeled the mortality-based strategy by removing
infants, the elderly, and health-care workers from the
network based on reported maximum coverage and efficacy
levels for these demographics \[12,26\] (Table 2). This yielded
13% coverage of the total population (Table 3). We then
implemented the remaining strategies to match this overall
coverage level. (We consider the sensitivity of our results to
the coverage level in Protocol S1 and Figure S4.) Targeted
groups were removed in proportion to demographic-specific
vaccine coverage levels reported in the 2002 National Health
Interview Survey by the CDC \[26\], and the vaccine efficacy
levels were based on age-specific rates reported for inactivated influenza vaccine \[12\].

Epidemiological Analysis
We define the transmissibility of a disease, T, as the average

Epidemiological Analysis
We define the transmissibility of a disease, T, as the average
probability that an infectious individual will transmit the
disease to a susceptible individual with whom he or she has
contact. This term summarizes important features of disease
propagation including the contact rates among individuals,
the duration of the infectious period, and the per contact
probability of transmission. This per contact probability of
transmission, in turn, summarizes the susceptibility (immune
response) and the infectiousness (viral shedding) of individuals. Our analysis allows for variation in transmission rates
from one individual to the next, but it assumes that these
rates vary randomly with respect to the underlying contact
patterns. There is evidence, however, that transmission rates
may vary systematically among demographics, and, in
particular, may be highest for children \[27\]. In Protocol S1
and Figure S6, we consider modified models that explicitly

Table 3. Vaccination Coverage and Efficacy Levels Assumed for the Mortality-Based Vaccination Strategy

| Group | Implemented Coverage Level | Vaccine Efficacy | Effective Coverage Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Infants and toddlers(6mo-3y) | 75%(4.1% of total population) | 90% | 68% |
| Elders(>50y) | 85%(7.5% of total population) | 50% | 43% |
| Health-care workers | 38%(0.4% of total population) | 90% | 34% |
| Elders in care facilities | 95%(0.7% of total population) | 50% | 48% |
| Total | 12.7% of total population |  |  |

The effective coverage level is a product of the implemented coverage level and the vaccine efficacy for each group.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.t003

* * *

Figure 3. Morbidity and Mortality for Influenza Epidemics and Pandemics
Expected (A) attack rate and (B) mortality rate as a function of T for annual influenza epidemics.

Expected (A) attack rate and (B) mortality rate as a function of T for annual influenza epidemics.
Expected (C) attack rate and (D) mortality rate as a function of T for an influenza pandemic.

Expected (A) attack rate and (B) mortality rate as a function of T for annual influenza epidemics.
Expected (C) attack rate and (D) mortality rate as a function of T for an influenza pandemic.
The dots in (A) show simulation results for comparison. Estimates of R0 for interpandemic and pandemic flu are shown as gray lines in (B) and (D),

Expected (C) attack rate and (D) mortality rate as a function of T for an influenza pandemic.
The dots in (A) show simulation results for comparison. Estimates of R0 for interpandemic and pandemic flu are shown as gray lines in (B) and (D),
respectively.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g003

respectively.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g003

{T}{,}

R\_{0}

capture such demographic-specific variation in transmission
rates and show that this additional complexity does not alter
the results reported below.
T is linearly related to the key epidemiological parameter

the results reported below.
T is linearly related to the key epidemiological parameter
R0. In particular, R0 is equal to T j, where j is a measure of the
connectivity within the population (network) \[19,28\]. Intuitively, R0 is largest for highly contagious pathogens (represented by a high T) spreading through densely connected
populations (represented by a high j). R0¼ 1 corresponds to a
critical transmissibility value Tc, above which a population is
vulnerable to large-scale epidemics and below which only
small outbreaks occur \[28\].
We used methods based on contact network epidemiology

R\_{0}.

R\_{0}

R\_{0}

We used methods based on contact network epidemiology
\[16–19\] to predict the fate of an influenza outbreak as a
function of the average transmissibility T of the strain. For any
contact network, one can mathematically predict the epidemic threshold (Tc), the average size of a small outbreak (s),
the average size (Se) and probability (Pe) of a large-scale
epidemic, and demographic-specific attack rates for an
epidemic, should one occur. Mortality is predicted by multiplying the expected number of infections for a given group by
the age-specific mortality rate assumed for that group. (See
Protocol S1 for additional details.)
To verify these mathematical predictions, we performed

\\check{R}\_{0}!=!1

\\left(P\_{\\mathrm{e}}\\right)

(S\_{\\mathrm{e}})

\\left(T\_{\\mathrm{c}}\\right)

are generally consistent with the mathematical calculations
(Figure 3), and thus we primarily report the analytical results.
Immunity from prior outbreaks is an important aspect of

We compared the age-specific attack rates predicted by our
models to those reported for both interpandemic flu and the
1918 pandemic (Figure 4). First, we considered data from the
interpandemic outbreak of 1977–1978 reported by Longini et
al. \[3\]. They reported age-specific attack rates from a
household study of 159 families in Seattle, Washington,
United States, in which infection was determined through
hemagglutination-inhibition assays. We do not know the
exact age-specific influenza vaccination coverage rates during
this period. We assumed that the population was protected
according the current CDC strategy (the mortality-based
strategy), and then used our model to predict demographicspecific attack rates. We estimated the average transmissi-

* * *

B

Comparison of predicted to observed age-specific attack rates for (A) the 1977–1978 influenza season and (B) the 1918 influenza pandemic.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g004

bility of the disease by solving for the value of T that produces
the observed total attack rate (T ¼ 0.07, or R0 ¼ 1.2). Thus, the
total attack rate was constrained to match perfectly the
observed total attack rate, while the demographic-specific
attack rates were free to vary. The predictions of the model
are consistent with the observed epidemiology (Figure 4A).
We note, however, that the reliability of this comparison is
limited by the small sample size of the Seattle study and the
lack of information about vaccine coverage and efficacy
during that period.
Second, we made a similar comparison using age-specific

Results/Discussion

(scriptstyle{T=}0.07,

R\_{0}!=!1.2)

Second, we made a similar comparison using age-specific
attack rate data for the 1918 pandemic that were collected
and reported by Frost in 1920 \[29\]. The data are based on a
survey of approximately 146,000 people (representing a
cross-section of the US population, which at the time
numbered 103 million). Infection rates for influenza were
based on self-reported responses by study participants. There
was no vaccination available for influenza at the time in the
US, and thus we made epidemiological predictions assuming
no vaccination. Again, we began by solving for an average
transmissibility that produces the observed total attack rate
and found T ¼ 0.09 (or R0 ¼ 1.8). As a consistency check, this
estimate agrees very closely with the recently revised estimate
for the pandemic influenza reproductive rate \[30\], based on
US and UK 1918 pandemic mortality data. Assuming this
average transmissibility, we predicted demographic-specific
attack rates and found that they matched the observed
patterns reasonably well (Figure 4B).

R\_{0}!=!1.8)

T!=!0.09

T!=!0.15)

tion of unvaccinated individuals who would otherwise
become infected via transmission chains that have now been
severed by vaccination. Indeed, for all strains, these two
strategies are predicted to yield the lowest attack rates (Figure
3A). If the primary objective is to reduce morbidity from
influenza, then the morbidity-based and contact-based
strategies are always preferred, although their advantage
decreases as disease transmissibility (T) increases.
One might argue that the primary objective of intervention
should be to reduce mortality rather than morbidity. The

decreases as disease transmissibility (T) increases.
One might argue that the primary objective of intervention
should be to reduce mortality rather than morbidity. The
CDC’s recent vaccine priorities seem to be based on this
objective \[12\]. In terms of mortality, there is a specific
transmissibility value below which the morbidity-based and
contact-based strategies are superior and above which the
mortality-based strategies are superior (Figure 3B). To clarify
this transition (which occurs for our network at T ¼ 0.13), we
show in Figure 5 the proportions of the adult and elderly
subpopulations that are infected, vaccinated, and uninfected
for the two strategies at two values of T. The uninfected class
is made up of individuals that have neither been vaccinated
nor get infected. Some of these individuals would not be
infected in any case, and the rest are those that would be
infected without a vaccination program but are now
protected by the effects of herd immunity. Below the
transition point (for instance, at T ¼ 0.1), the elderly are
protected more by the indirect effects of the morbidity-based
strategy than by the direct effects of the mortality-based
strategy. Above the transition point (for instance, at T ¼ 0.15),
the indirect protection by the morbidity-based strategy drops
substantially, resulting in a higher proportion of elderly
individuals infected than with the mortality-based strategy. A
similar reversal occurs for infants. The mixed strategy—a
combination of the morbidity-based and mortality-based
strategies—is never the optimal strategy (Figure 3B), yet may

* * *

Figure 5. Direct versus Indirect Intervention
The figure shows the proportions of the adult and elderly populations that are infected, not infected (neither vaccinated nor infected), and vaccinated

The figure shows the proportions of the adult and elderly populations that are infected, not infected (neither vaccinated nor infected), and vaccinated
for two different values of T for the mortality-based strategy versus the morbidity-based strategy.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g005

be an advisable bet-hedging strategy when there is great
uncertainty about the transmissibility of the circulating
strain.
Estimates of R0 for interpandemic flu range between 1.0

strain.
Estimates of R0 for interpandemic flu range between 1.0
and 2.4 for the A (H2N2) and A (H3N2) strains of influenza
(\[31,32\] and references therein). Since influenza vaccines have
been used in the US since 1944, these estimates may be based
on partially vaccinated populations. Conservatively assuming
that the populations in question had somewhere between no
coverage at all and 13% coverage according to the contactbased strategy, these values of R0 (1.0 , R0, 2.4) correspond
to 0.06 , T , 0.26 in our model (See Protocol S1.) This range
straddles the critical cross-points in Figure 3B, leaving some
ambiguity as to which strategy will be most effective. We note,
however, that the higher the transmissibility, the more dire
the public health situation, and mortality-based strategies are
predicted to be more effective for highly contagious strains.
Highly Virulent Influenza

R\_{0}

R\_{0},(1.0<R\_{0}<2.4)

Highly Virulent Influenza
The demographic-specific

0.06<T!<0.26

Despite these substantial differences, the predictions for
pandemic and interpandemic flu are qualitatively similar.
The morbidity-based and contact-based strategies outperform mortality-based strategies in terms of resulting mortality for low values of T, but not for higher values. There is a
quantitative difference, however, in that the transition point
between these two regimes happens at a higher transmissibility for pandemic flu than for interpandemic flu (Figure 3D
versus 3B). In other words, morbidity-based strategies are
preferred for a wider spectrum of pandemic flu strains than
of interpandemic flu strains. This stems, in part, from the
much larger size of the high-risk population (adults) for
pandemic flu. Under vaccine limitations (13% in this case),
the mortality-based strategy protects a much smaller fraction
of the pandemic high-risk population than of the interpandemic high-risk population. We have found that increasing
the vaccination level to 20% does not change the qualitative
results (shown in Protocol S1 and Figure S4). Patel et al. have
recently performed a similar sensitivity analysis on vaccine
availability \[34\].
Thereproductivenumber(R0) for the 1918 Spanish

Most communities do not exist in isolation, and thus
experience multiple independent introductions of the virus
during a typical flu season. Many models of vaccination
strategies \[8,9\], however, ignore this possibility. To better

* * *

A

B

Figure 6. The Epidemiological Impact of Multiple Introductions of Disease
(A) The morbidity-based strategy is more effective than the mortality-based strategy when T is less than 0.13 only if there is only a single introduction of

Figure 6. The Epidemiological Impact of Multiple Introductions of Disease
(A) The morbidity-based strategy is more effective than the mortality-based strategy when T is less than 0.13 only if there is only a single introduction of
disease. With four introductions of disease, however, the morbidity-based strategy becomes less effective (and is the preferred strategy only when T is
less than 0.12.)
(B) At T ¼ 0.125, the morbidity-based strategy is superior to the mortality-based strategy when there is a single introduction, but inferior when there is

less than 0.12.)
(B) At T ¼ 0.125, the morbidity-based strategy is superior to the mortality-based strategy when there is a single introduction, but inferior when there is
more than one introduction.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g006

understand the probability and rates of new importations of
flu, one must consider a meta-population model that includes
connectivity among cities. Here we address the consequences
of multiple introductions, but not the likelihood of such
events in the first place. For mathematical simplicity, we
assumed that multiple independent introductions occur
simultaneously (and initial cases are chosen randomly) at
the start of an outbreak, which yields conservative estimates
of their detrimental impact. The probability of an epidemic
increases with the number of introductions for all strategies,
thereby reducing the advantage of the morbidity-based and
contact-based strategies for mildly transmissible strains. For
example, if there are four independent introductions of flu,
morbidity-based strategies are inferior to mortality-based
strategies above T ¼ 0.12 (R0 ¼ 2.1). In contrast, this shift takes

place at T ¼ 0.13 (R0 ¼ 2.3), when there is a single importation
of disease (Figure 6).

T!=!0.12,(R\_{0}!=!2.1)

T!=!0.13,(R\_{0}!=!2.3)

Delayed Intervention
A similar analysis provides

A similar analysis provides insight into the impact of a
delay in intervention until after an outbreak is already in
progress, as occurred during the 2000–2001 flu season \[36\].
This scenario may also be particularly relevant to pandemic
influenza, for which vaccines may only become available well
into an outbreak, if at all. We simulate the implementation of
vaccination after a certain proportion of the population has
already been infected. We call this proportion ‘‘delay.’’ The
morbidity-based strategies are more sensitive to such delays
than mortality-based methods are (Figure 7). They are
predicted to be inferior above T ¼ 0.11 (R0 ¼ 1.9) if there is

Figure 7. The Epidemiological Impact of Delayed Vaccination
(A) The morbidity-based strategy is more effective than the mortality-based strategy when T is less than 0.13 only if there is there is no delay in

(A) The morbidity-based strategy is more effective than the mortality-based strategy when T is less than 0.13 only if there is there is no delay in
vaccination. When vaccines are given after 10% of the population has already been infected, the morbidity-based strategy becomes relatively less
effective (and is the preferred strategy only when T is less than 0.11).
(B) At T ¼ 0.125, the morbidity-based strategy is superior to the mortality-based strategy when there is no delay, but inferior for any amount of delay.

I!=!0.125

A

T!=!0.11~(R\_{0}=1.9)

(B) At T ¼ 0.125, the morbidity-based strategy is superior to the mortality-based strategy when there is no delay, but inferior for any amount of delay.
Each of the values is an average taken across 500 epidemic simulations on the contact network.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g007

Each of the values is an average taken across 500 epidemic simulations on the contact network.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.g007 a 10% delay in vaccination, compared to T ¼ 0.13 (R0 ¼ 2.3)
when there is no delay.
Figures 6 and 7 suggest that a delay in vaccination may be

T!=!0.13~(R\_{0}!=!2.3)

Figures 6 and 7 suggest that a delay in vaccination may be
less detrimental than multiple introductions of disease into a
population. Multiple independent introductions of disease
provide multiple independent opportunities to spark a largescale epidemic. In the absence of vaccination, the probability
of an epidemic increases considerably as the number of
independent introductions increases (Protocol S1). In contrast, a delay in vaccination allows a single case to grow into a
connected cluster of cases, which are not independent of each
other with respect to the numbers and the identities of their
contacts. The probability of an epidemic increases with the
number of individuals in the initial cluster, but not as quickly
as it does with the addition of independent cases.

Conclusion
In this study, we have applied the analytical methods of

If more precise estimates of the key inputs become available,
then this approach can be applied to design optimal (rather
than just prudent) priorities. To reduce the existing uncertainty in estimates of influenza transmission and mortality
rates, we must improve surveillance methods for gathering
real-time data and develop new statistical methods for
examining data from both historical and future outbreaks, as
were developed to estimate R0 for SARS during the 2003
outbreaks \[37\]. Current estimates of flu transmission rates are
based primarily on compartmental models of disease transmission (\[31,32\] and references therein). Some of the variation
in the estimates of R0 may stem from variation in contact
patterns among different populations rather than intrinsic
variation in the probability of disease transmission between
individuals who come in contact with one another. While
compartmental models often do not capture such contact
heterogeneity, contact network models allow one to factor out

R\_{0}

R\_{0}

variation in contact patterns when estimating transmission
rates. Thus, the development of better estimation methods
using contact network models may yield more accurate
estimates of some key epidemiological parameters.

Supporting Information
Figure S1. (Normalized) Degree for Various Demographic Groups before and afterDistributions Vaccination (with the Interpandemic Mortality-Based Strategy and the Morbidity-Based Strategy)
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.sg001 (65 KB PDF).
Figure S2. Variation in the Size of Epidemic and Total Mortality
Predicted for Mortality-Based and Morbidity-Based Strategies across
100 Networks with 100% Variation in Contact Parameters
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.sg002 (64 KB PDF).
Figure S3. Epidemiological Predictions for Five Different Estimated
Influenza Mortality Distributions
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.sg003 (67 KB PDF).
Figure S4. Total Mortality at a 20% Vaccination Coverage Level
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.sg004 (61 KB PDF).
Figure S5. Results from Simulation Demonstrate that the Two
Methods of Modeling Vaccine Efficacy Give Similar Results
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.sg005 (65 KB PDF).
Figure S6. Results for Total Mortality Rate with Variation in
Infectivity and Susceptibility
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.sg006 (58 KB PDF).
Protocol Quantitative Comparison of Influenza Vaccination
Programs S1.
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030387.sd001 (159 KB PDF).
Acknowledgments

Supporting Information

The authors would like to thank Martin Meltzer, Robert C. Brunham,
Mel Krajden, Danuta M. Skowronski, and James Lloyd-Smith for their
insightful suggestions. We also thank three anonymous referees for
their valuable comments and suggestions.
Author contributions. All three authors contributed to the design,

Author contributions. All three authors contributed to the design,
analysis, and presentation of this work.

Acknowledgments

References

01. Govaert TME, Thijs CT, Masurel N, Sprenger MJ, Dinant GJ, et al. (1994)
    The efficacy of influenza vaccination in elderly individuals. JAMA 272:
    1661–1665.
02. Brandriss MW, Betts RF, Mathur U, Douglas RG Jr (1981) Responses of
    elderly subjects to monovalent A(HINI) and trivalent A(HINI)/A(H3N2)/B
    vaccines. Am Rev Respir Dis 124: 681–684.
03. Longini IM, Koopman JS, Monto AS, Fox JP (1982) Estimating household
    and community transmission parameters of influenza. Am J Epidemiol 115:
    736–751.
04. Fox JP, Hall CE, Cooney MK, Foy HM (1982) Influenza virus infections in
    Seattle families, 1975–1979. Am J Epidemiol 116: 212–227.
05. Jennings LC, Miles JAR (1978) A study of acute respiratory disease in the
    community of Port Chalmers. J Hyg (Lond) 81: 67–75.
06. Taber LH, Paredes A, Glezen WP, Couch RB (1982) Infection with influenza
    A/Victoria virus in Houston families. J Hyg (Lond) 86: 303–313.
07. Glezen WP (1996) Emerging infections: Pandemic influenza. Epidemiol Rev
    18: 64–76.
08. Longini IM Jr, Halloran ME, Nizam A, Yang Y (2004) Containing pandemic
    influenza with antiviral agents. Am J Epidemiol 159: 623–633.
09. Longini IM, Halloran ME (2005) Strategy for distribution of influenza
    vaccine to high-risk groups and children. Am J Epidemiol 161: 303–
    306. Monto AS, Koopman JS, Longini IM Jr (1985) The Tecumseh study of
             illness. XIII. Influenza infection and disease. Am J Epidemiol 121: 811–822.
11. Reichart TA, Sugaya N, Fedson DS, Glezen WP, Simonsen L, et al. (2001)
    The Japanese experience with vaccinating school-children against influenza. N Engl J Med 344: 889–896.
12. Harper SA, Fukuda K, Uyeki TM, Cox NJ, Bridges CB, et al. (2004)
    Prevention and control of influenza: Recommendations of the Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 53: 1–40.
13. Dezso Z, Barabasi AL (2001) Halting viruses in scale-free networks. Phys Rev
    E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 65: 055103.

* * *

14. Pastor-Satorras R, Vespignani A (2001) Immunization of complex networks. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 65: 036104.

15. Woolhouse ME, Dye C, Etard JF, Smith T, Charlwood JD, et al. (1997)

16. Woolhouse ME, Dye C, Etard JF, Smith T, Charlwood JD, et al. (1997)
    Heterogeneities in the transmission of infectious agents: Implications for
    the design of control programs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94: 338–342.

17. Meyers LA, Newman MEJ, Martin M, Schrag S (2003) Applying network


71–81.
18\. Pourbohloul B, Meyers LA, Skowronski DM, Krajden M, Patrick DM, et al.
(2005) Modeling Control Strategies of Respiratory Pathogens. Emerg Infect
Dis. 11: 1249–1256
19\. Meyers LA, Newman MEJ, Pourbohloul B (2006) Predicting epidemics on

17. Meyers LA, Pourbohloul B, Newman MEJ, Skowronski DM, Brunham RC
    (2005) Network theory and SARS: Predicting outbreak diversity. JTB. 232:
    71–81.
18. Pourbohloul B, Meyers LA, Skowronski DM, Krajden M, Patrick DM, et al.

directed contact networks. J Theor Biol 240: 400–418.
20\. Thompson WW, Shay DK, Weintraub E (2004) Influenza-associated
hospitalizations in the United States. JAMA 292: 1333–1340.
21\. Thompson WW, Shay DK, Weintraub E, Brammer L, Cox N, et al. (2003)

21. Thompson WW, Shay DK, Weintraub E, Brammer L, Cox N, et al. (2003)
    Mortality associated with influenza and respiratory syncytial virus in the
    United States. JAMA 289: 179–186.

22. Luk J, Gross P, Thompson WW (2001) Observations on mortality during the

23. Luk J, Gross P, Thompson WW (2001) Observations on mortality during the
    1918 influenza pandemic. Clin Infect Dis 33: 1375–1378.

24. Dauer CC, Serfling RE (1961) Mortality from influenza, 1957–1958 and

25. Dauer CC, Serfling RE (1961) Mortality from influenza, 1957–1958 and
    1959–1960. Am Rev Respir Dis 83: 15–26.

26. Olsen DR, Simonsen L, Edelson PJ, Morse SS (2005) Epidemiological


1959–1960. Am Rev Respir Dis 83: 15–26.
24\. Olsen DR, Simonsen L, Edelson PJ, Morse SS (2005) Epidemiological
evidence of an early wave of the 1918 influenza pandemic in New York City.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102: 11059–11063.
25\. Paul Y (2004) Herd immunity and herd protection. Vaccine 22: 301–302.

25. Paul Y (2004) Herd immunity and herd protection. Vaccine 22: 301–302.
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2005) Interim estimates of

shortage priority groups. Atlanta (Georgia): Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. 2 p.
27\. Cauchemez S, Carrat F, Viboud C, Valleron AJ, Boelle PY (2004) A Bayesian
MCMC approach to study transmission of influenza: Application to
household longitudinal data. Stat Med 23: 3469–3487.
28\. Newman MEJ (2002) Spread of epidemic disease on network. Phys Rev E
Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 66: 016128.
29\. Frost WH (1920) Statistics of influenza morbidity: With special reference to
certain factors in case incidence. Public Health Rep 36: 584–597.
30\. Ferguson NM, Cummings DA, Cauchemez S, Fraser C, Riley S, et al. (2005)
Strategies for containing an emerging influenza pandemic in Southeast
Asia. Nature 437: 209–214.
31\. Hethcote HW (2000) The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM Rev 42:
599–653.
32\. Grais RF, Ellis JH, Kress A, Glass GE (2004) Modeling the spread of annual
influenza epidemics in the U.S.: The potential role of air travel. Health Care
Manag Sci 7: 127–134.
33\. Noble GR (1982) Epidemiological and clinical aspects of influenza. In:
Beare AS, editor. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton
(Florida): CRC Press. pp. 11–50.
34\. Patel R, Longini IM, Halloran ME (2005) Finding optimal vaccination
strategies for pandemic influenza using genetic algorithms. J Theor Biol
234: 201–212.
35\. Mills CE, Robins JM, Lipsitch M (2004) Transmissibility of 1918 pandemic
influenza. Nature 432: 904–906.
36\. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2000) Flu season 2000–01: Flu
vaccine supply. Atlanta (Georgia): Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Available: [http://www.cdc.gov/od/oc/media/pressrel/r2k0622a](http://www.cdc.gov/od/oc/media/pressrel/r2k0622a).
htm. Accessed 25 March 2005.
37\. Cauchemez S, Boelle PY, Donnelly CA, Ferguson NM, Thomas G, et al.
(2006) Real-time estimates in early detection of SARS. Emerg Infect Dis 12:
110–113.

25. Paul Y (2004) Herd immunity and herd protection. Vaccine 22: 301–302.
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2005) Interim estimates of
    populations targeted for influenza vaccination from 2002 National Health
    Interview Survey data and estimates for 2004 based on influenza vaccine

Editors’ Summary

Background. Influenza—a viral infection of the nose, throat, and airways
that is transmitted in airborne droplets released by coughing or
sneezing—is a serious public health threat. Most people recover quickly
from influenza, but some individuals, especially infants, old people, and
individuals with chronic health problems, can develop pneumonia and
die. In the US, seasonal outbreaks (epidemics) of flu cause an estimated
36,000 excess deaths annually. And now there are fears that avian
influenza might start a human pandemic—a global epidemic that could
kill millions. Seasonal outbreaks of influenza occur because flu viruses
continually change the viral proteins (antigens) to which the immune
system responds. ‘‘Antigenic drift’’—small changes in these proteins—
means that an immune system response that combats flu one year may
not provide complete protection the next winter. ‘‘Antigenic shift’’—
large antigen changes—can cause pandemics because communities
have no immunity to the changed virus. Annual vaccination with
vaccines based on the currently circulating viruses controls seasonal flu
epidemics; to control a pandemic, vaccines based on the antigenically
altered virus would have to be quickly developed.
Why Was This Study Done? Most countries target vaccination efforts

Why Was This Study Done? Most countries target vaccination efforts
towards the people most at risk of dying from influenza, and to healthcare workers who are likely come into contact with flu patients. But is
this the best way to reduce the burden of illness (morbidity) and death
(mortality) caused by influenza, particularly at the start of a pandemic,
when vaccine would be limited? Old people and infants are much less
likely to catch and spread influenza than school children, students, and
employed adults, so could vaccination of these sections of the
population—instead of those most at risk of death—be the best way
to contain influenza outbreaks? In this study, the researchers used an
analytical method called ‘‘contact network epidemiology’’ to compare
two types of vaccination strategies: the currently favored mortality-based
strategy, which targets high-risk individuals, and a morbidity-based
strategy, which targets those segments of the community in which most
influenza cases occur.

Additional Information. Please access these Web sites via the online
version of this summary at [http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed).
0030387.
US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention information about

vaccination
US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases feature on
seasonal, avian, and pandemic influenza
World Health Organization fact sheet on influenza, with links to

strains, this situation was reversed. The level of transmissibility at which
this reversal occurred depended on several factors, including whether
vaccination was delayed and how many times influenza was introduced
into the community.
What Do These Findings Mean? The researchers tested their models by
checking that they could replicate real influenza epidemics and
pandemics, but, as with all mathematical models, they included many
assumptions about influenza in their calculations, which may affect their
results. Also, because the contact network used data from Vancouver,
their results might not be applicable to other cities, or to nonurban
areas. Nevertheless, their findings have important public health
implications. When there are reasonable estimates of the viral transmission rate, and it is known how often influenza is being introduced
into a community, contact network models could help public health
officials choose between morbidity-and mortality-based vaccination
strategies. When the viral transmission rate is unreliable or unavailable
(for example, at the start of a pandemic), the best policy would be the
currently preferred strategy of mortality-based vaccination. More
generally, the use of contact network models should improve estimates
of how infectious diseases spread through populations and indicate the
best ways to control human epidemics and pandemics.
Additional Information. Please access these Web sites via the online

US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention information about
influenza for patients and professionals, including key facts on
vaccination
US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases feature on

seasonal, avian, and pandemic influenza
World Health Organization fact sheet on influenza, with links to
information on vaccination
UK Health Protection Agency information on seasonal, avian, and
pandemic influenza
MedlinePlus entry on influenza

pandemic influenza
MedlinePlus entry on influenza