New Variants and Age Shift to High Fatality Groups
Contribute to Severe Successive Waves in the 2009
Influenza Pandemic in Taiwan

Ji-Rong Yang1, Yuan-Pin Huang1, Feng-Yee Chang1, Li-Ching Hsu1, Yu-Cheng Lin1, Chun-Hui Su1,
1,3
Pei-Jer Chen2, Ho-Sheng Wu _, Ming-Tsan Liu1_

1 Centers for Disease Control, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC, 2 College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC, 3 School of Medical Laboratory Science and
Biotechnology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC

Abstract

Past influenza pandemics have been characterized by the signature feature of multiple waves. However, the reasons for
multiple waves in a pandemic are not understood. Successive waves in the 2009 influenza pandemic, with a sharp increase
in hospitalized and fatal cases, occurred in Taiwan during the winter of 2010. In this study, we sought to discover possible
contributors to the multiple waves in this influenza pandemic. We conducted a large-scale analysis of 4703 isolates in an
unbiased manner to monitor the emergence, dominance and replacement of various variants. Based on the data from
influenza surveillance and epidemic curves of each variant clade, we defined virologically and temporally distinct waves of
the 2009 pandemic in Taiwan from May 2009 to April 2011 as waves 1 and 2, an interwave period and wave 3. Except for
wave 3, each wave was dominated by one distinct variant. In wave 3, three variants emerged and co-circulated, and formed
distinct phylogenetic clades, based on the hemagglutinin (HA) genes and other segments. The severity of influenza was
represented as the case fatality ratio (CFR) in the hospitalized cases. The CFRs in waves 1 and 2, the interwave period and
wave 3 were 6.4%, 5.1%, 15.2% and 9.8%, respectively. The results highlight the association of virus evolution and variable
influenza severity. Further analysis revealed that the major affected groups were shifted in the waves to older individuals,
who had higher age-specific CFRs. The successive pandemic waves create challenges for the strategic preparedness of
health authorities and make the pandemic uncertain and variable. Our findings indicate that the emergence of new variants
and age shift to high fatality groups might contribute potentially to the occurrence of successive severe pandemic waves
and offer insights into the adjustment of national responses to mitigate influenza pandemics.

Citation: Yang J-R, Huang Y-P, Chang F-Y, Hsu L-C, Lin Y-C, et al. (2011) New Variants and Age Shift to High Fatality Groups Contribute to Severe Successive
Waves in the 2009 Influenza Pandemic in Taiwan. PLoS ONE 6(11): e28288. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028288

Editor: Thomas F. Schulz, Hannover Medical School, Germany

Received August 10, 2011; Accepted November 4, 2011; Published November 30, 2011

Copyright: 2011 Yang et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

Funding: This study was supported by grants from the National Science Council (National Research Program for Genome Medicine 98-0324-01-F-20 and 99-0324-
01-F-12) and the Centers for Disease Control, Department of Health, Taiwan (DOH99-DC-2027, DOH100-DC-2019 and DOH100-DC-2022). The funders had no role
in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

- E-mail: [wuhs@cdc.gov.tw](mailto:wuhs@cdc.gov.tw) (HSW); [mtliu@cdc.gov.tw](mailto:mtliu@cdc.gov.tw) (MTL)

Since an influenza outbreak caused by swine-origin influenza A
(H1N1) viruses was detected initially in Mexico and USA during
March and April 2009 \[1\], the viruses spread rapidly to an
increasing number of countries. During the early stage of the 2009
pandemic, data from genetic analyses suggested that the influenza
A (H1N1) 2009 viruses (termed ‘‘2009 H1N1 viruses’’ for
convenience) had begun to evolve and diversified from April 1
to July 9, 2009 into at least 7 clades (clades 1–7) with spatial and
geographic patterns \[2\], and the viruses in the early stage did not
possess genomic signatures associated with high pathogenicity in
the PB2, PB1-F2, HA and NS1 proteins \[3\]. Among the
circulating viruses, the clade 7 viruses with a signature S220T
substitution in the HA protein have spread more widely and
become a globally major strain, and this dominated early in New
York from April to July 2009 \[4\]. Some new variants derived from
clade 7 were detected later in Australia, New Zealand, Singapore,
Hong Kong and the United Kingdom \[5,6,7\], which raised the
concern that the evolving viruses might be responsible for

Introduction

In Taiwan, the first case infected by 2009 H1N1 viruses was
detected following imposed entry screening of a traveler from the
USA on 20 May 2009 \[15\]. From July 2009, severe complicated
influenza and death cases attributable to infection by 2009 H1N1
viruses occurred and began to be reported to the Centers for
Disease Control, Taiwan. To clarify the relationship between the
2009 H1N1 viruses and disease severity during the successive

increased disease severity. The severity during the early 2009
pandemic was estimated to be less than that seen in the 1918
influenza pandemic and comparable to that seen in the 1957
pandemic \[8\]. The severity of the following autumn-winter
pandemic wave in 2009–2010 remained mild and did not change,
with mortality rates in the range from lower to slightly higher than
that associated with seasonal influenza \[9,10,11\]. In the successive
waves, increased severity was reported in Wales, UK and
Wisconsin, USA \[5,12,13\], but data from New Zealand revealed
that the overall impact of the second wave of the 2009 pandemic
in 2010 was between one half and two thirds that of the first wave
in 2009 \[14\]. The severity of the 2009 pandemic in the following
years remains uncertain.
In Taiwan, the first case infected by 2009 H1N1 viruses was waves, we analyzed comprehensively the evolution of 2009 H1N1
viruses isolated from May 2009 to April 2011 in Taiwan and
defined virologically and temporally distinct waves of the 2009
pandemic, each of which was dominated by various variants. The
case fatality ratio (CFR) in the hospitalization cases, representative
of the severity, was found to increase in the successive waves and
the age distribution of hospitalized cases was shifted to older
groups, which had higher age-specific CFRs. The results reveal
that virus changes and age shifts to the older groups with a high
risk of death may contribute to the occurrence of successive waves
in an influenza pandemic.

Results

Virus evolution of influenza A (H1N1) 2009 viruses in
Taiwan from May 2009 to April 2011
Based on influenza laboratory surveillance from community and

Based on influenza laboratory surveillance from community and
hospitalized cases in Taiwan, 2009 H1N1 viruses were prevalent
from July 2009 to January 2010 and recurred with a sharp

increase in hospitalized cases in December 2010. Other influenza
epidemics, predominated by influenza B, accompanied by
influenza A (H3N2) viruses, occurred from March to November
2010 (Fig. 1A, B). The virus distributions in community and
hospitalized cases were similar except for influenza B viruses,
which caused relatively fewer severe cases. During the two-year
period, a total of 6451 cases infected by 2009 H1N1 viruses (4435
from community, and 2016 from hospitalized, cases) were
diagnosed by real-time RT-PCR and/or virus culture. In order
to monitor the detailed scenario of the time of introduction and
evolutionary pattern of the newly emerging 2009 H1N1 viruses,
4703 available cultured viruses (3741 from community, and 962
from hospitalized cases) were selected and analyzed by sequencing
their HA genes. We developed a protocol for analyzing the amino
acid substitutions chronologically by directly visualizing the
proteotyping map. After determining the amino acid sequences
of the HA protein (residue positions 131–394) of the 4703 isolates,
substitutions at specific positions with high entropy were plotted
(Figure 2A). The proteotyping map revealed that, from May to

Figure 1. Monthly distribution of influenza isolates from (A) community outpatients and (B) hospitalized patients, confirmed in
Taiwan from May 2009 to April 2011 by the laboratory-based surveillance network. Each virus is indicated by a bar of varying color and
positivity rates of confirmed cases are included. The trends in both groups were similar. Influenza A (H1N1) 2009 viruses were the predominant
subtype circulating from May 2009 to January 2010 and December 2010 to April 2011, while influenza A (H3N2) and influenza B viruses also were
detected and co-circulated, especially from March to November in 2010. Influenza B viruses caused fewer hospitalized cases than the other two
viruses.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028288.g001

B

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028288.g001

* * *

Factors for Successive Pandemic Waves

Figure 2. Evolution and emergence of influenza A (H1N1) 2009 viruses in Taiwan from May 2009 to April 2011. (A) Substitutions in the

HA protein were visualized through a proteotyping map. Each column represents the indicated position of a specific amino acid, and these are shown by different colors, given in the key (single-letter abbreviations are used). Each row represents a single isolate and the 4703 analyzed isolates are displayed in the order of time of collection. (B) Various clade variants at different time periods were classified based on the HA genes. During the 2009 pandemic in Taiwan from May 2009 to April 2011, four periods were defined virologically and temporally as three major waves (waves 1, 2 and 3) and the interwave period. Each wave was dominated by one distinct variant, except for wave 3, in which three variants emerged and co-circulated. The major amino acid signatures of each clade were as follows: 220S for clade 1,6, S220T-391E for clade 7, E391K for clade 8, N142D-E391K for clade 8-1, A151T-S200P-E391G for clade 9, R222K-V266L-K300E-E391K for clade 10, and S202T-E391K for clade 11 viruses. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028288.g002

PLoS ONE \| [www.plosone.org](http://www.plosone.org/) November 2011 \| Volume 6 \| Issue 11 \| e28288 manner. Then, viruses carrying the substitution E391K emerged
and became dominant in November. N142D was the second
temporally aggregative substitution and occurred from February
to November 2010, and was reversed thereafter (Fig. 2A). A larger
number of amino acid substitutions began to be detected from
December 2010, including T137A, A151T, S160G, S200P,
S202T, A214T, R222K, I233V/G, V266L and K300E. The E/
K391G substitution changed again and coexisted with the 391K
population. These temporally aggregative substitutions can serve
as signatures to define new variants and to differentiate clades in
the phylogenetic analysis of HA sequences. Based on the
proteotyping map and phylogenetic topology, these isolates were
divided into various variants by HA clade and epidemic curves of
the various variants were plotted (Fig. 2B). This revealed the clade
prevalence during various periods in Taiwan. At the early stage
during May to September 2009, most of the isolates had the
significant signature S220T, which was previously defined as clade
7 by Nelson et al. \[2\]. Isolates with the E391K substitution, which
were designated as clade 8 in this study, rapidly replaced clade 7
viruses and became dominant in November. During the period
from February to November 2010, the dominant viruses changed
again to clade 8–1, with both the E391K and N142D signatures,
and circulated with low activity (Fig. 2B). In the influenza season of
2010–2011, from December 2010 another three new genetic
variants, designated as clades 9, 10 and 11, emerged. The
signatures of these viruses were 151T-200P-391G-526M, 14I-
222K-233V/G-266L-300E-391K and 202T-391K-468N, respectively, while clade 11 could be further classified into clades 11-1
and 11-2 by the respective substitutions D114N and A214T
(Fig. 3A and Table S1). The results showed that there was a total
of three virus replacements, following the emergence of 2009
H1N1 viruses in Taiwan, and new genetic variants, with
additional substitutions in the HA proteins, were formed by the
last replacement. In addition to the analysis of HA genes, we also
performed full-genomic sequencing of 29 representative isolates,
selected from the various HA clade viruses (clade 1–6, 7, 8, 8–1, 9,
10, 11–1 and 11–2). The tree topologies of the concatenated PB2-
PB1-PA-NP-NA-MP-NS sequences showed a similar pattern to
that of the HA gene (Fig. 3B). This indicated that the newly
emerging clade 9, 10 and 11 viruses were also phylogenetically
distinct in the other genomic segments. Table S1 shows the clade
specific substitution patterns of the 8 proteins encoded by the
complete viral genome. In clades 8 and 8–1, amino acid changes
in HA occurred simultaneously with those in the PB1, NP, NA and
NS1 proteins. In clades 9, 10 and 11, HA substitutions paralleled
those of the PB2, PB1, PA, NA, M1 and NS1 proteins (Table S1).
This indicated that variants of 2009 H1N1 viruses emerging
during the winter of 2010 had changed in multiple gene segments.
The dynamic evolution of these viruses poses a potential threat of

Varying influenza severity in the 2009 pandemic in
Taiwan
To combine the data from influenza surveillance and epidemic

To combine the data from influenza surveillance and epidemic
curves of each clade variant, we defined virologically and
temporally distinct waves of the 2009 pandemic from May 2009
to April 2011 in Taiwan as follows (Fig. 2B): The larger epidemic
from May 2009 to January 2010 could be divided into the first two
waves. Wave 1, dominated by clade 7 viruses, ran from May to
early October 2009, followed by wave 2, dominated by clade 8
viruses, from late October 2009 to January 2010. The other peak,
from December 2010 to April 2011, in which clades 9, 10 and 11

viruses co-circulated, was termed wave 3. Of note, the interwave
period, dominated by specific clade 8-1 viruses, occurred from
February to November 2010 during the period with a low activity
of 2009 H1N1 viruses. Because the different waves were
dominated by distinct clade variants, we wished to compare the
influenza severity in these four time periods. The case fatality ratio
(CFR) in the hospitalized cases was representative of the severity of
influenza. The CFRs in four periods of waves 1 and 2, the
interwave period and wave 3 were 6.4% (26/406), 5.1% (27/525),
15.2% (17/112) and 9.8% (95/972), respectively (Table 1). Among
the three major waves of 2009 H1N1 viruses, the CFR of wave 3,
which had an increasing number of fatal cases, was higher than
those of the first two waves (Table 1; 9.8%, vs. 6.4%, p,0.05 and
5.1%, p,0.05). Of note, the highest CFR occurred in the
interwave period (15.2%, p,0.05). For the co-circulating
influenza A (H3N2) and influenza B viruses during this two-year
period, the respective CFRs in the hospitalized patients were 8.7%
(71/820) and 4.9% (7/142) (Table 2). The data reveal that the
severity of the 2009 pandemic was lower than that of seasonal
influenza (H3N2) at the early stage and increased in the following
waves (p,0.05). To investigate why the CFRs increased in the
successive waves, we compared in detail the age-specific CFRs in
the hospitalized cases in various waves. The age-specific CFRs in
hospitalized cases increased with age and were the highest in the
group aged .65 years for H3N2, influenza B, as well as waves 1
and 2 of 2009 H1N1 infection (Fig. 4A). For the interwave period
and wave 3 of 2009 H1N1 infection, individuals with the highest
age-specific CFRs were adults aged 50–64 years (29.2%, 7/24 and
17.1%, 51/298, respectively), while those of the individuals aged
.65 years remained as high as 10.0% (2/20 ) and 12.7% (21/
166), respectively (Fig 4A and Table 1). Regarding the percentage
of fatal cases in each age group, young adults aged 18–49 years
were the major group for 2009 H1N1 infection in waves 1 (46.1%,
12/26) and 2 (44.5%, 12/27), and this shifted to older adults aged
50–64 years (p,0.05) in the interwave period (41.2%, 7/17) and
wave 3 (53.7%, 51/95), while individuals aged .65 years were the
major group for H3N2 and influenza B infection (Fig 4B and
Table 1, 2). For the age characteristics of hospitalized and
community cases, the major affected population for the 2009
H1N1 infection in waves 1 and 2 were school children aged 5–17
years, and this shifted to young adults aged 18–49 years in the
interwave period and wave 3 (p,0.05). Of note, the percentages of
the population older than 50 years who were hospitalized also
increased to 39.3% (44/112) and 47.7% (464/972), respectively, in
the interwave period and wave 3, accompanied by a dramatic
increase in fatal cases (p,0.05). For H3N2 and influenza B
infection, the major groups among hospitalized cases were
individuals aged.65 years and school children, respectively,
while those predominant among community cases were school
children and young adults, respectively (Figure 4C, D and Table 1,
2). Based on these results, the age distribution of the infected
populations in the successive waves of the 2009 H1N1 infection,
including community and hospitalized cases, shifted significantly
to older groups, who had higher age-specific CFRs and
contributed to the increase of influenza severity during these
stages of the 2009 pandemic in Taiwan.
Discussion

Past influenza pandemics, such as those caused by influenza A
(H1N1) from 1918 to 1919, influenza A (H2N2) from 1957 to
1963 and influenza A (H3N2) from 1968 to 1970, have been
characterized by several distinct features, including changes in the
virus subtype, shifts of the highest death rates to younger

* * *

Factors for Successive Pandemic Waves

PLoS ONE \| [www.plosone.org](http://www.plosone.org/) November 2011 \| Volume 6 \| Issue 11 \| e28288

* * *

Figure 3. Phylogenetic relationships of the (A) HA and (B) PB2-PB1-PA-NP-NA-MP-NS concatenated sequences of influenza A
(H1N1) 2009 viruses circulating from May 2009 to April 2011. The phylogenetic trees were constructed using the neighbor-joining method
with 1000 bootstrap replications. Branch values of more than 70 are indicated. The genome sequences obtained from the NCBI database of the 6
early viral isolates collected before May 30, 2009 in Taiwan, A/Taiwan/T0724/2009, A/Taiwan/T0826/2009, A/Taiwan/T1338/2009, A/Taiwan/T1339/
2009, A/Taiwan/T1773/2009, and A/Taiwan/T1821/2009, as well as the current vaccine strain, A/California/7/2009, are included as reference
sequences. The classification of specific evolutionary clades is indicated.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028288.g003

populations, multiple waves, higher transmissibility than seasonal
influenza, and varying impacts in different geographic regions
\[16\]. These factors, especially information on virus evolution and
disease severity during the continuous pandemic waves, were all
crucial for evaluating the impact of the disease and for
consideration of influenza response plans. For the 2009 pandemic,
until now, the features of multiple waves remained unclear. The
estimated severity indicated by the CFRs in hospitalized cases was
7% during April to June 2009 in the USA \[17\] and 4.1–8% in the
USA, Norway and Austria in the following fall and winter
\[11,18,19\]. In the Southern Hemisphere, the CFRs in hospitalized
patients in 2009 (the first wave) varied between 2.4% and 7.6% in
various studies \[20\]. In Taiwan, the CFR of the hospitalized cases
calculated from July 2009 to January 2010 in this study was 5.7%
(53/931), while those of the influenza A (H3N2) and influenza B
viruses were 8.6% (71/820) and 4.9% (7/142), respectively. The
data revealed that severity of 2009 H1N1 illness in the early stage
was milder than that of seasonal influenza A (H3N2) viruses.
However, in the successive wave from December 2010, the new
genetic variants of clades 9, 10 and 11 viruses emerged with an
increase in CFRs from 6.4% and 5.1% to 9.8% (p,0.05),
indicating that successive severe waves of the 2009 pandemic
occurred in Taiwan. Although the reasons for increased severity in
successive waves were unclear, they were likely to include virus
changes, seasonality, medical measures and the overall immunity
of the population \[16\]. In this study, these factors also were
considered. First, the increase in fatality between the waves of a
pandemic was likely to be attributable to the generation and
emergence of mutated viruses, with increased pathogenicity and
greater adaptation to the human host, while we had observed that
various variants of 2009 H1N1 viruses were dominant during
different periods of the pandemic and associated with varying
fatality in hospitalized patients. Genetic mutations and reassortments have been reported potentially to enhance the virulence of
2009 H1N1 viruses \[21,22,23\]. In Taiwan, the genome signatures
of the evolving 2009 H1N1 viruses in successive waves were
identified in this study, including T257A in PB1, E391K in HA
and M93I in the NS1 protein of clade 8 viruses in wave 2; A652V
in PB1, N142D in HA, K400R-K452R in NP, and M15I-N189S
in NA of clade 8-1 in the interwave period; V225I-V511I-V584I-
V667I in PB2, R211K-I435V in PB1, D479E in PA, A151T-
S200P-E391G-R526M in HA, I389V-V394I in NA, and E55Q in
NS1 of clade 9; A221S in PB2, V113A-K386R in PB1, V14I in
PA, T14I-R222K-I233V/G-V266L-K300E in HA, S299A-I374V
in NA, and P162L in NS1 of clade 10; V344M-V354L in PB2,
N321K in PA, S202T-S468N in HA, V241I-N369K in NA and
V80I in M1 of clade 11 (additional N456S in PB2, I330V in PA,
and D114N in HA of clade 11-1, as well as I397M in PB1, A343T
in PA, A214T in HA, N44S in NA and L90I in NS1 of clade 11-2)
in wave 3 (Table S1). Among these HA mutations, N142D was
located in the known antigenic Sa site, and R222K was located in
the antigenic Ca site \[24\]. The mutations, S200P, A214T and
I233V, near receptor binding sites may affect the interaction of
HA with its receptor \[25,26\]. Although only few of these residues
had been reported \[27,28\], their undetermined effects on virus
pathogenicity may be significant. Another important amino acid

populations, multiple waves, higher transmissibility than seasonal substitution, D239G, was analyzed and compared in different
regions waves; this is known to cause a shift to a dual a2–3/a2–6-sialic
\[16\]. These factors, especially information on virus evolution and acid linkage specificity, allowing the mutant protein to bind to
disease severity during the continuous pandemic waves, were all both human and avian receptors \[29\] and has reportedly been
and for associated with severe cases \[30\]. In our study, the respective
consideration of influenza response plans. For the 2009 pandemic, percentages of this D239G substitution in 2009 H1N1 viruses from
until now, the features of multiple waves remained unclear. The hospitalized cases during waves 1 and 2, the interwave period and
estimated severity indicated by the CFRs in hospitalized cases was wave 3 were 1.9% (4/210), 1.5% (4/276), 7.9% (3/38) and 1.4%
7% during April to June 2009 in the USA \[17\] and 4.1–8% in the (6/438), while those in community cases were 0.3% (4/1597), 0%
winter (0/977), 0.5% (1/190) and 0.1% (1/977), respectively. The
\[11,18,19\]. In the Southern Hemisphere, the CFRs in hospitalized percentages of viruses harboring 239G were in the ratio of 6.3–
patients in 2009 (the first wave) varied between 2.4% and 7.6% in 15 between those from hospitalized and community cases during
various studies \[20\]. In Taiwan, the CFR of the hospitalized cases the three major waves (1.9% vs. 0.3%; 1.5% vs. 0%; 1.4% vs.
calculated from July 2009 to January 2010 in this study was 5.7% 0.1%, respectively). Of note, a dramatic percentage increase (7.9%
(53/931), while those of the influenza A (H3N2) and influenza B of hospitalized vs. 0.5% of community cases, p,0.05) in the
viruses were 8.6% (71/820) and 4.9% (7/142), respectively. The interwave period, accompanied by the highest CFR in hospitalized
data revealed that severity of 2009 H1N1 illness in the early stage cases, also was observed. The occurrence of this substitution was
viruses. not clade-specific, but these data could highlight the important
However, in the successive wave from December 2010, the new impact of virus changes on influenza severity in future waves and it
genetic variants of clades 9, 10 and 11 viruses emerged with an was therefore essential for continuous surveillance of the trends of
(p,0.05), virus evolution. The second factor, seasonality of various waves,
pandemic was analysed. In Taiwan, wave 1 and the interwave period were
occurred in Taiwan. Although the reasons for increased severity in outside the regular influenza season. Waves 2 and 3 were in the
successive waves were unclear, they were likely to include virus winter influenza season, although wave 2 was two months earlier
changes, seasonality, medical measures and the overall immunity than the usual timing. As cold temperature and low humidity have
were been reported to enhance influenza transmission in an animal
considered. First, the increase in fatality between the waves of a model \[31\], the effect of seasonality on the severity of various
and waves of influenza was not observed in this study. The other
emergence of mutated viruses, with increased pathogenicity and factors, medical measures and overall immunity of the population,
greater adaptation to the human host, while we had observed that such as antiviral medication and vaccine administration, were
during discussed. During the two-year period, only few sporadic 2009
varying H1N1 viruses from cases after drug-treatment were found to carry
fatality in hospitalized patients. Genetic mutations and reassort-the substitution H275Y in the NA protein, conferring resistance to
ments have been reported potentially to enhance the virulence of oseltamivir \[32\]. The policy of use of government-funded antiviral
2009 H1N1 viruses \[21,22,23\]. In Taiwan, the genome signatures agents, which aimed to decrease the spread of viruses and to
were minimize the occurrence of severe cases, is consistent and antiviral
identified in this study, including T257A in PB1, E391K in HA agents were prescribed for cases from cluster outbreaks and of
and M93I in the NS1 protein of clade 8 viruses in wave 2; A652V reported severity, and extended to the patients who presented
in PB1, N142D in HA, K400R-K452R in NP, and M15I-N189S danger signs of developing severe disease during the peak of
in NA of clade 8-1 in the interwave period; V225I-V511I-V584I-influenza activity. Therefore, the consistent policy of antiviral
V667I in PB2, R211K-I435V in PB1, D479E in PA, A151T-agents in Taiwan did not seem to involve in the variety of
S200P-E391G-R526M in HA, I389V-V394I in NA, and E55Q in influenza severity in various waves. Finally, for overall immunity of
NS1 of clade 9; A221S in PB2, V113A-K386R in PB1, V14I in the population, which was attributed to pre-exposure to infection
PA, T14I-R222K-I233V/G-V266L-K300E in HA, S299A-I374V and vaccination, was considered. Serologic data from previous
in NA, and P162L in NS1 of clade 10; V344M-V354L in PB2, studies at the early stage of the 2009 pandemic suggested that a
N321K in PA, S202T-S468N in HA, V241I-N369K in NA and higher proportion of persons aged above 60 years may have pre-
V80I in M1 of clade 11 (additional N456S in PB2, I330V in PA, existing immunity to the 2009 H1N1 viruses due to past infection
and D114N in HA of clade 11-1, as well as I397M in PB1, A343T \[33\]. It was also shown that the major population of hospitalized
in PA, A214T in HA, N44S in NA and L90I in NS1 of clade 11-2) and fatal cases in the 2009 pandemic was younger than those
in wave 3 (Table S1). Among these HA mutations, N142D was commonly seen with seasonal influenza \[34\]. In our study, the
located in the known antigenic Sa site, and R222K was located in attack rates of 2009 H1N1 viruses showed that school children
the antigenic Ca site \[24\]. The mutations, S200P, A214T and aged 5-17 years were also the major affected targets of this virus in
I233V, near receptor binding sites may affect the interaction of waves 1 and 2, which differed from those of influenza A (H3N2)
HA with its receptor \[25,26\]. Although only few of these residues viruses (Table 1 and 2; p,0.05). During the interwave period and
had been reported \[27,28\], their undetermined effects on virus wave 3, the predominant infected cases shifted to young adults and
pathogenicity may be significant. Another important amino acid the percentages of school children in community and hospitalized

* * *

Table 1. Cases infected by influenza A (H1N1) 2009 viruses in various periods in Taiwan from May 2009 to April 2011.

| Age of patients | Wave 1 |  |  |  |  | Wave 2 |  |  |  | Interwave period |  |  |  | Wave 3 |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Community cases(%) | Hospitalized cases(%) | Fatal cases(%) | CFR\* | Community cases(%) | Hospitalized cases(%) | Fatal cases(%) | CFR | Community cases(%) | Hospitalized cases(%) | Fatal cases(%) | CFR | Community cases(%) | Hospitalized cases(%) | Fatal cases(%) | CFR |  |  |
| 0~23 months | 41(2.1) | 4(1.0) | 0(0) | 0 | 25(2.2) | 14(2.6) | 0(0) | 0 | 8(3.2) | 0(0) | 0(0) | 0 | 63(5.8) | 3(0.3) | 0(0) | 0 |  |
| 2-4 years | 95(4.8) | 16(4.0) | 0(0) | 0 | 63(5.6) | 42(8.0) | 1(3.7) | 2.4 | 29(11.5) | 4(3.6) | 0(0) | 0 | 126(11.6) | 54(5.5) | 2(2.1) | 3.7 |  |
| 5-17 years | 1309(66.1) | 167(41.1) | 4(15.4) | 2.4 | 801(71.6) | 198(37.7) | 2(7.4) | 1.0 | 77(30.4) | 12(10.7) | 2(11.8) | 16.7 | 399(36.9) | 81(8.3) | 2(2.1) | 2.5 |  |
| 18-49 years | 488(24.6) | 143(35.2) | 12(46.1) | 8.4 | 210(18.8) | 171(32.6) | 12(44.5) | 7.0 | 124(49.0) | 52(46.4) | 6(35.3) | 11.5 | 420(38.8) | 370(38.1) | 19(20.0) | 5.1 |  |
| 50-64 years | 38(1.9) | 48(11.8) | 6(23.1) | 12.5 | 17(1.5) | 65(12.4) | 7(25.9) | 10.8 | 9(3.6) | 24(21.4) | 7(41.2) | 29.2 | 63(5.8) | 298(30.7) | 51(53.7) | 17.1 |  |
| ≥65 years | 10(0.5) | 28(6.9) | 4(15.4) | 14.3 | 3(0.3) | 35(6.7) | 5(18.5) | 14.3 | 6(2.4) | 20(17.9) | 2(11.7) | 10.0 | 11(1.0) | 166(17.1) | 21(22.1) | 12.7 |  |
| Total | 1981(100) | 406(100) | 26(100) | 6.4 | 1119(100) | 525(100) | 27(100) | 5.1 | 253(100) | 112(100) | 17(100) | 15.2 | 1082(100) | 972(100) | 95(100) | 9.8 |  |

| Age of patients | Influenza A(H3N2) |  |  |  | Influenza B |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Community cases(%) | Hospitalized cases(%) | Fatal cases(%) | CFR\* | Community cases(%) | Hospitalized cases(%) | Fatal cases(%) | CFR |  |
| 0-23 months | 81(6.4) | 0(0) | 0(0) | 0 | 26(2.3) | 7(4.9) | 0(0) | 0 |
| 2-4 years | 137(10.9) | 22(2.7) | 0(0) | 0 | 92(8.3) | 9(6.3) | 0(0) | 0 |
| 5-17 years | 386(30.7) | 50(6.1) | 2(2.8) | 4 | 793(71.2) | 56(39.4) | 1(14.3) | 1.8 |
| 18-49 years | 452(35.9) | 162(19.8) | 6(8.5) | 3.7 | 179(16.1) | 39(27.5) | 0(0) | 0 |
| 50-64 years | 132(10.5) | 129(15.7) | 12(16.9) | 9.3 | 18(1.6) | 15(10.6) | 2(28.6) | 13.3 |
| ≥65 years | 70(5.6) | 457(55.7) | 51(71.8) | 11.2 | 5(0.4) | 16(11.3) | 4(57.1) | 25.0 |
| Total | 1258(100) | 820(100) | 71(100) | 8.7 | 1113(100) | 142(100) | 7(100) | 4.9 |

Table 2. Cases infected by influenza A (H3N2) and influenza B viruses in Taiwan from May 2009 to April 2011.

:The case fatality ratio (CFR) in hospitalized cases was defined as the percentage of fatal cases among the total number of hospitalized influenza case s and was calculated as the total number of fatal cases divided by the total
number of hospitalized cases.

* * *

A

B

C

D

Figure 4. Age-specific case fatality ratio in hospitalized cases (A), age characteristics of percentage of fatality cases (B), hospitalized
(C) and community (D) cases infected by 2009 H1N1 viruses in waves 1, 2, the interwave period and wave 3, as well as H3N2 and
influenza B viruses. The number of fatality, hospitalized and community cases and their percentages for 2009 H1N1, H3N2 and influenza B viruses
are described in Table 1 and 2.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028288.g004

^{3,}

are described in Table 1 and 2.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028288.g004

cases decreased from 68.1% (2110/3100) and 39.2% (365/931) to
35.7% (476/1335) and 8.6% (93/1084), respectively. Of note, the
cumulative percentage of hospitalized individuals aged .50 years
increased from 18.9% (176/931) to 46.9% (508/1084), accompanied by an increasing number of fatal cases (p,0.05). These data
suggested that the age shifts may result from the possible
protection of infection-acquired immunity in the younger
population after the early waves, following a higher attack rate
at the beginning of the 2009 pandemic. Another possible effect
may be attributed to influenza vaccination. In Taiwan, the vaccine
coverage rates of populations, who had received at least one dose
of H1N1 vaccine from November 2009 to March 2010, reached
22%, including 29%, 72%, and 11% of persons aged 6 months to
6 years, 7–18 years, and above 19 years, respectively \[35\], while
the cumulative percentage of those who had received at least one
dose of H1N1 vaccine from October 2010 to May 2011, reached
12.6%, including 25.8%, 64.4% and 37.3% of persons aged 6
months to 6 years, 7–12 years,and older than 65 years, respectively
(data not shown). Individuals aged 13–64 years were not included
in the government-funded vaccination program in 2010–2011
influenza season. This showed that the school children had the
highest vaccination rate and adults aged 18–64 were the shortfall
in influenza vaccination and the age-specific vaccine coverage
seemed to contribute to the shift of age to older groups. In this
study, we found that people aged above 50 years were the
population with the highest age-specific CFR during the 2009
pandemic in Taiwan. This was similar to the scenario of the past
influenza illness and data from the early 2009 pandemic, which
showed that persons aged above 50 years had the highest rates of
mortality once hospitalized \[7,19,34,36,37\]. The shift to older

groups, who had relatively higher age-specific CFRs, may have
contributed to the increased influenza severity in the successive
waves of the 2009 pandemic in Taiwan.
Several signature features of the 2009 pandemic were observed

Clinical specimens from outpatients with influenza-like illnesses
in communities (community cases, represented as mild cases) and
hospitalized patients who developed severe complications (hospitalized cases, represented as severe cases) were collected and
transported to the laboratories of the influenza surveillance
network in Taiwan, which is coordinated by the Centers for
Disease Control (Taiwan CDC), for influenza diagnosis using virus
culture or/and real-time RT-PCR \[15,38\]. For hospitalized cases
in Taiwan, influenza with severe complications is a notifiable
disease and patients who match one of the following criteria
defined by clinical symptoms should be reported and their clinical
specimens collected: (1) pulmonary complications (2) neurological
complications (3) myocarditis or pericarditis (4) invasive bacterial

Several signature features of the 2009 pandemic were observed
in our study: emergence and replacement of the genetic variants,
variable severity, and the targeted age shift to older groups. These
factors of virus changes, seasonality, medical measures and the
overall immunity of the population, which constitute unique
features of an influenza pandemic, are complicated and variable.
We found that both virus changes and age shifts to the older
groups with high risks of fatality may be important factors to
explain the increased severity during successive waves of an
influenza pandemic.

Collection of clinical specimens and virus isolates
Clinical specimens from outpatients with influenza-like illnesses infection (5) others: patients who have no above symptoms but
need treatment in an intensive care unit. When performing
diagnosis, both molecular analysis and direct virus isolation by cell
culture were conducted and all of the influenza isolates from
positive cases were transported to the Taiwan CDC for further
characterization. Viral RNA extraction from clinical specimens, as
well as influenza identification and subtyping, and the nucleotide
sequences of viral genes were determined by conventional RT-
PCR and sequencing and were processed using methods described
previously \[15,32\].

Proteotyping map and epidemic curves of various 2009
H1N1 variants in Taiwan from 2009 to 2011
A proteotyping map of the HA gene was constructed from the
putative amino acid sequences. For analysis, multiple alignments
were made of the amino acid sequences. The positions with high
entropy were then chosen and indicated on the map. Each type of
amino acid was represented by a color. On the map, the amino
acid residues of each virus were presented on the X axis and each
virus was ordered according to the collection date on the Y axis.
Based on the pattern of amino acid substitutions, we classified the
virus isolates into various groups and the epidemic curves of 2009
H1N1 variants in Taiwan were plotted.

Complete genome analysis of the 2009 H1N1 viruses
To investigate in detail the molecular phylogenies and genetic

Complete genome analysis of the 2009 H1N1 viruses
To investigate in detail the molecular phylogenies and genetic
diversities of the 2009 H1N1 viruses circulating from May 2009 to
April 2011 in Taiwan, full-genome sequences of the 29 representative viruses selected were determined. Sequences obtained from
the NCBI database of the 6 early viral isolates collected before May
30, 2009 in Taiwan, A/Taiwan/T0724/2009, A/Taiwan/T0826/
2009, A/Taiwan/T1338/2009, A/Taiwan/T1339/2009, A/Taiwan/T1773/2009, and A/Taiwan/T1821/2009, as well as the
current vaccine strain, A/California/7/2009, were included as
reference strains. The analyzed phylogenies were designated from
clade 1–6 to clade 11 with reference to a previous report \[2\].
Multiple sequence alignments, protein translation and phylogenetic
analysis were performed on the basis of nucleotide sequences using
the software MEGA4 and BioEdit ( [http://www.mbio.ncsu.edu/](http://www.mbio.ncsu.edu/)
BioEdit/bioedit.html). Phylogenetic trees were constructed by the
neighbor-joining method and 1,000 bootstrap replications were
performed to evaluate the robustness.

References

Case fatality ratio
The case fatality ratio of hospitalized case was calculated as the

The case fatality ratio of hospitalized case was calculated as the
total number of fatal cases divided by the total number of
hospitalized cases. The age-specific CFRs were calculated as the
number of fatal cases in a specific age group divided by the total
number of hospitalized cases within that group.

Table S1 Genome signatures of the evolving influenza A
(H1N1) 2009 viruses during various periods of the 2009
pandemic in Taiwan.
(DOC)

Statistical Analysis
Descriptive statistics were calculated to describe data from the

Descriptive statistics were calculated to describe data from the
influenza seasons. We used Microsoft Excel (2003) to produce
figures and calculate descriptive statistics such as mean, range, and
percentage. The chi-square test was performed using OpenEpi
Version 2.3.1 (Dean AG, Sullivan KM, Soe MM. OpenEpi: Open
Source Epidemiologic Statistics for Public Health, Version 2.3.1.
[www.OpenEpi.com](http://www.openepi.com/), updated 2011/23/06, accessed 2011/10/19).

References

1. CDC (2009) Outbreak of swine-origin influenza A (H1N1) virus infection -10. Shrestha SS, Swerdlow DL, Borse RH, Prabhu VS, Finelli L, et al. (2011)
   Mexico, March-April 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 58: 467–470. Estimating the burden of 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) in the United
2. Nelson M, Spiro D, Wentworth D, Beck E, Fan J, et al. (2009) The early States (April 2009-April 2010). Clin Infect Dis 52(Suppl 1): S75–82.
   diversification of influenza A/H1N1pdm. PLoS Curr Influenza. pp RRN1126. 11. Skarbinski J, Jain S, Bramley A, Lee EJ, Huang J, et al. (2011) Hospitalized
3. Neumann G, Noda T, Kawaoka Y (2009) Emergence and pandemic potential of patients with 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus infection in the United
   swine-origin H1N1 influenza virus. Nature 459: 931–939. States--September-October 2009. Clin Infect Dis 52 Suppl 1: S50–59.
4. Nelson MI, Tan Y, Ghedin E, Wentworth DE, St George K, et al. (2011) 12. Keramarou M, Cottrell S, Evans MR, Moore C, Stiff RE, et al. (2011) Two
   Phylogeography of the spring and fall waves of the H1N1/09 pandemic waves of pandemic influenza A(H1N1) 2009 in Wales--the possible impact of
   influenza virus in the United States. J Virol 85: 828–834. media coverage on consultation rates, April-December 2009. Euro Surveill 16.
5. Ellis J, Galiano M, Pebody R, Lackenby A, Thompson C, et al. (2011) 13. Truelove SA, Chitnis AS, Heffernan RT, Karon AE, Haupt TE, et al. (2011)
   Virological analysis of fatal influenza cases in the United Kingdom during the Comparison of patients hospitalized with pandemic 2009 influenza A (H1N1)
   early wave of influenza in winter 2010/11. Euro Surveill 16. virus infection during the first two pandemic waves in Wisconsin. J Infect Dis
6. Mak G, Leung C, Cheng K, Wong K, Lim W (2011) Evolution of the 203: 828–837.
   haemagglutinin gene of the influenza A(H1N1)2009 virus isolated in Hong 14. Bandaranayake D, Jacobs M, Baker M, Hunt D, Wood T, et al. (2011) The
   Kong, 2009-2011. Euro Surveill 16. second wave of 2009 pandemic influenza A(H1N1) in New Zealand, January-
7. Wilking H, Buda S, von der Lippe E, Altmann D, Krause G, et al. (2010) October 2010. Euro Surveill 16.
   Mortality of 2009 pandemic influenza A(H1N1) in Germany. Euro Surveill 15. 15. Yang JR, Lo J, Liu JL, Lin CH, Ho YL, et al. (2009) Rapid SYBR green I and
8. Fraser C, Donnelly CA, Cauchemez S, Hanage WP, Van Kerkhove MD, et al. modified probe real-time reverse transcription-PCR assays identify influenza
   (2009) Pandemic potential of a strain of influenza A (H1N1): early findings. H1N1 viruses and distinguish between pandemic and seasonal strains. J Clin
   Science 324: 1557–1561. Microbiol 47: 3714–3716.
9. Presanis AM, De Angelis D, Hagy A, Reed C, Riley S, et al. (2009) The severity 16. Miller MA, Viboud C, Balinska M, Simonsen L (2009) The signature features
   of pandemic H1N1 influenza in the United States, from April to July 2009: a of influenza pandemics--implications for policy. N Engl J Med 360: 2595–
   Bayesian analysis. PLoS Med 6: e1000207. 2598.

Supporting Information

We thank Dr. Tim J. Harrison (Internal Medicine, UCL Division of
Medicine, University College London) for critically reading the manuscript. We also thank the members and chiefs of Taiwan CDC Contracted
Virology Laboratories in the Influenza Surveillance Network of Taiwan.

Nucleotide sequences of influenza viruses in this study have
been submitted to GenBank and their accession numbers are from
JN187125-JN187356.

Author Contributions

Conceived and designed the experiments: JRY FYC PJC HSW MTL.
Performed the experiments: JRY YPH LCH YCL CHS. Analyzed the
data: JRY YPH LCH YCL CHS MTL. Contributed reagents/materials/
analysis tools: JRY YPH LCH YCL CHS MTL. Wrote the paper: JRY
MTL.

* * *

17. Jain S, Kamimoto L, Bramley AM, Schmitz AM, Benoit SR, et al. (2009)
    Hospitalized patients with 2009 H1N1 influenza in the United States, April-June

18. N Engl J Med 361: 1935–1944.

19. Brandsaeter BJ, Pillgram M, Berild D, Kjekshus H, Kran AM, et al. (2011)

20. Brandsaeter BJ, Pillgram M, Berild D, Kjekshus H, Kran AM, et al. (2011)
    Hospitalised patients with suspected 2009 H1N1 Influenza A in a hospital in
    Norway, July - December 2009. BMC Infect Dis 11: 75.

21. Poeppl W, Hell M, Herkner H, Stoiser B, Fritsche G, et al. (2011) Clinical

22. Poeppl W, Hell M, Herkner H, Stoiser B, Fritsche G, et al. (2011) Clinical
    aspects of 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus infection in Austria.
    Infection.

23. Falagas ME, Koletsi PK, Baskouta E, Rafailidis PI, Dimopoulos G, et al. (2011)

24. Christman MC, Kedwaii A, Xu J, Donis RO, Lu G (2011) Pandemic (H1N1)
    2009 virus revisited: An evolutionary retrospective. Infect Genet Evol 11:
    803–811.

25. Barr IG, Cui L, Komadina N, Lee RT, Lin RT, et al. (2010) A new pandemic
    influenza A(H1N1) genetic variant predominated in the winter 2010 influenza
    season in Australia, New Zealand and Singapore. Euro Surveill 15:pii: 19692.

26. Stevens J, Blixt O, Glaser L, Taubenberger JK, Palese P, et al. (2006) Glycan
    microarray analysis of the hemagglutinins from modern and pandemic influenza
    viruses reveals different receptor specificities. J Mol Biol 355: 1143–1155.

27. Kilander A, Rykkvin R, Dudman SG, Hungnes O (2010) Observed association
    between the HA1 mutation D222G in the 2009 pandemic influenza A(H1N1)
    virus and severe clinical outcome, Norway 2009-2010. Euro Surveill 15.

28. Lowen AC, Mubareka S, Steel J, Palese P (2007) Influenza virus transmission is
    dependent on relative humidity and temperature. PLoS Pathog 3: 1470–1476.

29. Yang JR, Huang YP, Lin YC, Su CH, Kuo CY, et al. (2010) Early Findings of
    Oseltamivir-Resistant Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 Influenza A Viruses in Taiwan.
    Antiviral Res 88: 256–262.

30. CDC (2009) Serum cross-reactive antibody response to a novel influenza A
    (H1N1) virus after vaccination with seasonal influenza vaccine. MMWR Morb
    Mortal Wkly Rep 58: 521–524.

31. Louie JK, Acosta M, Winter K, Jean C, Gavali S, et al. (2009) Factors associated
    with death or hospitalization due to pandemic 2009 influenza A(H1N1) infection
    in California. JAMA 302: 1896–1902.

32. Huang WT, Chen WW, Yang HW, Chen WC, Chao YN, et al. (2010) Design of
    a robust infrastructure to monitor the safety of the pandemic A(H1N1) 2009
    vaccination program in Taiwan. Vaccine 28: 7161–7166.

33. Nishiura H (2010) Case fatality ratio of pandemic influenza. Lancet Infect Dis
    10: 443–444.

34. Webb SA, Pettila V, Seppelt I, Bellomo R, Bailey M, et al. (2009) Critical care
    services and 2009 H1N1 influenza in Australia and New Zealand. N Engl J Med
    361: 1925–1934.

35. Shih SR, Chen GW, Yang CC, Yang WZ, Liu DP, et al. (2005) Laboratorybased surveillance and molecular epidemiology of influenza virus in Taiwan.
    J Clin Microbiol 43: 1651–1661.

36. Schrauwen EJ, Herfst S, Chutinimitkul S, Bestebroer TM, Rimmelzwaan GF,
    et al. (2011) Possible increased pathogenicity of pandemic (H1N1) 2009
    influenza virus upon reassortment. Emerg Infect Dis 17: 200–208.

37. Song MS, Pascua PN, Lee JH, Baek YH, Park KJ, et al. (2011) Virulence and

38. Falagas ME, Koletsi PK, Baskouta E, Rafailidis PI, Dimopoulos G, et al. (2011)
    Pandemic A(H1N1) 2009 influenza: review of the Southern Hemisphere
    experience. Epidemiol Infect 139: 27–40.

39. Schrauwen EJ, Herfst S, Chutinimitkul S, Bestebroer TM, Rimmelzwaan GF,

40. Song MS, Pascua PN, Lee JH, Baek YH, Park KJ, et al. (2011) Virulence and
    genetic compatibility of polymerase reassortant viruses derived from the
    pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus and circulating influenza A viruses. J Virol 85:
    6275–6286.

41. Chutinimitkul S, Herfst S, Steel J, Lowen AC, Ye J, et al. (2010) Virulence-

42. Chutinimitkul S, Herfst S, Steel J, Lowen AC, Ye J, et al. (2010) Virulenceassociated substitution D222G in the hemagglutinin of 2009 pandemic influenza
    A(H1N1) virus affects receptor binding. J Virol 84: 11802–11813.

43. Igarashi M, Ito K, Yoshida R, Tomabechi D, Kida H, et al. (2010) Predicting

44. Igarashi M, Ito K, Yoshida R, Tomabechi D, Kida H, et al. (2010) Predicting 35.
    the antigenic structure of the pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza virus
    hemagglutinin. PLoS One 5: e8553.

45. de Vries RP, de Vries E, Moore KS, Rigter A, Rottier PJ, et al. (2011) Only two 36.

46. Jayaraman A, Pappas C, Raman R, Belser JA, Viswanathan K, et al. (2011) A
    Single Base-Pair Change in 2009 H1N1 Hemagglutinin Increases Human
    Receptor Affinity and Leads to Efficient Airborne Viral Transmission in Ferrets.
    PLoS One 6: e17616.