RESEARCH ARTICLE

Assessment of 2021/22 influenza epidemic
scenarios in Italy during SARS-CoV-2 outbreak

1☯ 2☯ 4,5☯
Maria Chironna, Giovanni DipierroID \*, Jean Marie Franzini3, Giancarlo Icardi,
1☯ 6☯
Daniela Loconsole, Elena Pariani, Stefano Pastore3, Marco Volpe3

OPEN ACCESS

1 Department of interdisciplinary Medicine, University of Bari, Aldo Moro Policlinico, Bari, Italy, 2 G-nous s.r.
l., Bari, Italy, 3 BIP Life Sciences, BIP spa, Milan, Italy, 4 Department of Health’s Science (DiSSal), University
of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 5 Hygiene Unit, San Martino Policlinico Hospital-IRCCS for Oncology and
Neurosciences, Genoa, Italy, 6 Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy

Citation: Chironna M, Dipierro G, Franzini JM,
Icardi G, Loconsole D, Pariani E, et al. (2023)
Assessment of 2021/22 influenza epidemic
scenarios in Italy during SARS-CoV-2 outbreak.
PLoS ONE 18(3): e0282782. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.1371/journal.pone.0282782

Data Availability Statement: The minimal data set
underlying the results described in our manuscript
can be found in Section 2 and reference therein. In
detail, the model parameters are shown in Table 1,
while the data set used to model the impact of
vaccination and social mixing patterns are taken by
literature. These data allow to replicate the reported
study findings in their entirety.

Editor: Rajnesh Lal, Fiji National University, FIJI

Published: March 9, 2023

Received: December 22, 2022

Accepted: February 22, 2023

☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.

- [giovanni.dipierro@g-nous.com](mailto:giovanni.dipierro@g-nous.com)

Abstract

Global mitigation strategies to tackle the threat posed by SARS-CoV-2 have produced a significant decrease of the severity of 2020/21 seasonal influenza, which might result in a
reduced population natural immunity for the upcoming 2021/22 influenza season. To predict
the spread of influenza virus in Italy and the impact of prevention and control measures, we
present an age-structured Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Removed (SEIR) model including the role of social mixing patterns and the impact of age-stratified vaccination strategies
and Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) such as school closures, partial lockdown, as
well as the adoption of personal protective equipment and the practice of hand hygiene. We
find that vaccination campaigns with standard coverage would produce a remarkable mitigation of the spread of the disease in moderate influenza seasons, making the adoption of
NPIs unnecessary. However, in case of severe seasonal epidemics, a standard vaccination
coverage would not be sufficiently effective in fighting the epidemic, thus implying that a
combination with the adoption of NPIs is necessary to contain the disease. Alternatively, our
results show that the enhancement of the vaccination coverage would reduce the need to
adopt NPIs, thus limiting the economic and social impacts that NPIs might produce. Our
results highlight the need to respond to the influenza epidemic by strengthening the vaccination coverage.

1. Introduction

* * *

**P L O S O N E** 2021/22 Italian influenza scenario during SARS-CoV-2 outbreak

**Competing interests: The authors have declared** The adoption of these measures since the first months of 2020 have produced a remarkable that no competing interests exist. decrease of the severity of seasonal influenza-like illnesses (ILI) during the 2020/21 season \[2–4\], with numbers detected being similar to those reported during inter-seasonal periods. Similarly to COVID-19, seasonal influenza (flu) is a highly infectious respiratory disease transmitted primarily by air (drops and aerosols) that can cause serious health complications. In a typical year, the global ILI incidence ranges between 5 and 10 percent for adults and between 20 and 30 percent for chil- dren, out of which an estimated 3 to 5 million are severe, leading to about 250,000 to 500,000 flu- related deaths \[5\]. Although the COVID-19 control measures helped to prevent flu from circulat- ing during the 2020/21 season \[6\], the decrease of the severity of ILI might imply a lower popula- tion immunity for the season 2021/22, since most people have not been exposed to ILI for over a year \[7, 8\]. This would leave the most vulnerable people at risk of serious illness. In the light of this, influenza vaccination can cover a key role in limiting the diffusion of seasonal influenza infection, as well as in avoiding the overwhelming of healthcare systems that are already under pressure \[9, 10\]. Recent studies have shown that the COVID-19 out- break have produced an increase of adherence to flu vaccination, reaching the highest coverage in the vaccination campaign 2020/21 \[11–13\]. Moreover, a large number of studies have dem- onstrated that NPIs have significant effects on the spread of airborne epidemics \[14–16\]. Due to the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the unpredictability of the influenza virus, it is therefore timely to investigate the expected flu epidemic scenarios for the upcoming 2021/22 season by taking into account the impact of the currently adopted NPIs and the influ- enza vaccination strategies in order to support both individual decision-making and policy- making in the fight against flu epidemics. By providing authorities with predictions about the distribution of the ILI over the different age classes, it will be allowed to develop preparedness plans in order to timely respond to a possible pandemic outbreak \[17, 18\]. As suggested by recent studies (e.g., \[19, 20\]), the development of mathematical approaches to model the dynamic of the epidemic and the impact of control and prevention measures can provide a tool to assess and compare the effectiveness of different public health measures to control the disease and can be considered a necessary practice to infer valuable information for public health policymakers \[21\]. Although there are some limitations in modelling real-life situations, mathematical models have been used to characterize the dynamic of previous dis- eases such as the Ebola virus \[22\], influenza \[23, 24\] and COVID-19 \[25–28\]. This paper aims to explore a wide range of influenza epidemic scenarios for the season 2021/22 in Italy by taking into account the impact of single and multiple control and preven- tion measures in the spread of the disease for different seasonal severity. The characteristics of the epidemic scenarios are assessed through an age-structured deterministic Susceptible- Exposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR) epidemiological model, suitably extended in order to properly model age-structured social mixing and the impact of the control and prevention measures. The investigation of these scenarios is crucial for policymakers to infer the impact of implementing measures and to assess whether vaccination campaign strategies need to be revised to successfully lessen the public health burden. The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the SEIR epidemiological model and the explored scenarios. Results are presented in Section 3, followed by discussions in Section 4. Finally, the concluding remarks are drawn in Section 5.

## 2\. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Epidemic model

We develop an age-structured deterministic compartment model based on the well-known SEIR model \[29, 30\], originally introduced as an epidemic model for the description of the

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782) March 9, 2023 2 / 17 dynamics of an infectious disease in a homogeneous and well-mixed population. Among the
different approaches developed in the past (e.g., \[31, 32\]), mathematical modelling based on
compartmental dynamical systems can often provide essential information of the epidemic
dynamics, especially in cases where there is large uncertainty in the impact of the prevention
and control measures for containing the spread of the disease. We extend the classical SEIR
model through the introduction of age-structuring and the incorporation of the social mixing
patterns (e.g., \[33, 34\]), thus relaxing the assumption of homogeneous mixing across population age groups.
The social mixing of age-structured population in our model is captured through the use of

The social mixing of age-structured population in our model is captured through the use of
a realistic model of mixing patterns computed from routinely collected socio-demographic
data of the Italian population \[33\] (see Sect. 2.2). We stratify the population into four classes:
infants (0–4 years), children (5–14 years), adults (15–64 years) and the elderly ( 65 years).
The total population is distributed among the different age classes according to the Italian population Census updated to January 1, 2019 \[35\].
Our model includes the impact of movement restrictions on population mixing by scaling

(\\geq65

Our model includes the impact of movement restrictions on population mixing by scaling
age-structured contact matrices accordingly (see Sect. 2.2). Moreover, the model discriminates
between different severity of illness for infected individuals by taking into account moderate
cases, defined as infected individuals that require a treatment by General Practitioners (GP) or
in Emergency Rooms (ER) and life-threatening cases that require Intensive Care Unit (ICU)
treatment. We investigate the characteristics of seasonal influenza without distinguishing
between the specific subtypes of influenza virus. However, as described below, the parameters
of the model are computed by averaging epidemiological characteristics of two influenza virus
subtypes, i.e., H1N1 and H3N2, which are the main subtypes causing seasonal influenza \[36\].
We assume a population made of individuals subdivided into the following mutually exclu-

We assume a population made of individuals subdivided into the following mutually exclusive seven compartments for each age class i = 1,...,4,:

i!=1,\\ldots,4

1. Susceptible (Si): individuals able to contract the flu,

2. Exposed (Ei): susceptible which have been exposed to contagious (exposed and infected)
   individuals and are able to infect,


\\left(E\_{i}\\right)

3. Infected (Ii): infected individuals,

{\\mathrm{ ~~}~~}(I\_{i}.

4. GP/ER treated (Gi): infected individuals being treated by general practitioners or in emergency rooms,

5. ICU treated (Ti): infected individuals requiring critical medical care in ICU,

6. Recovered (Ri): individuals removed from the epidemic dynamics by recovering or by getting the vaccination,


i!=\ 1,\ ...4

ð1Þ

t\\left((\\mathrmmathrm{{i.e.}},N\_{i}=S\_{i}(t)+E\_{i}(t)+I\_{i}(t)+G\_{i}(t)+T\_{i}(t)+R\_{i}(t)+D\_{i}(t)

We consider closed age classes with no births and natural deaths, such that the population
number Niof age class i is the sum of individuals in all the compartments of that age class over
time t (i.e., Ni¼ SiðtÞ þ EiðtÞ þ IiðtÞ þ GiðtÞ þ TiðtÞ þ RiðtÞ þ DiðtÞ). We assume that the
probability of reinfection of recovered individuals is negligible, ensuring a lifelong immunity
to the influenza upon recovery. The transitions of individuals between different compartments
are modelled by a system of seven ordinary differential equations, describing the evolution of
the population for each age class i = 1,...,4 over time t, i.e.,

N\_{i}

\\frac{\\mathrm{d}S\_{i}}{\\mathrm{d}t}=-\\beta\_{i}p\_{i}S\_{i}\\sum\_{j=1}^{4}M\_{i j}\\cfrac{I\_{j}+E\_{j}}{N\_{j}}-\\epsilon\_{i}(t)c\_{i}S\_{i},

* * *

**P L O S O N E** 2021/22 Italian influenza scenario during SARS-CoV-2 outbreak

dE _i_ X 4 _I_ _j_ þ E _j_ ¼ b p S _i i iMij_ sE; _i_ ð2Þ dt _j¼1_ _Nj_

dI _i_ ¼ sE _i_ gI _i_ m I; _i i_ ð3Þ dt

dG _i_ ¼ a gI _i i_ gG _i_ m G; _i i_ ð4Þ dt

dT _i_ ¼ b gI _i i_ gT _i_ m T; _i i_ ð5Þ dt

dR _i_ ¼ ð1 _aib ÞgI þ gðG þ T Þ þ ðtÞc S;i i i i i i i_ ð6Þ dt

dD _i_ ¼ m ðI þ G þ T Þ; _i i i i_ ð7Þ dt

where the upper-case letters denotes the state variables (S _i_, E _i_, I _i_, G _i_, T _i_, R _i_, D _i_) introduced above and M _ij_ indicates the contact matrix (see Sect. 2.2), defined as average number of daily contacts between an individual in age class i with an individual in age class j, where i, _j = 1,...,4. The lower-case letters denote the transition rates and the fraction of individual_ moving between different compartments, defined as follows:

- β _i_ is the probability of disease transmission (see Sect. 2.4) in a single contact between a sus- ceptible in age class i and a contagious individual (exposed or infected). We assume that exposed individual can transmit the virus at early stages before symptoms develop, as con- firmed by epidemiological investigations (e.g., \[36\]);

- p _i_ is the susceptibility to infection, taken from \[37\], Chapter 6, Fig 2;

- σ denotes the rate at which individuals move from exposed to infected, while γ is the rate of transition from the compartment of the infected to the compartments of GP/ER treated, ICU treated or recovered. Their values are related to the incubation time t _σ_ = σ
  −1 and the remission time t _γ_ = γ −1 , assumed to be equal to 1.5 and 4 days respectively \[38–40\];

- a _i_ denotes the fraction of infected individuals being treated by general practitioners or in emergency rooms, while b _i_ is the fraction of infected individuals requiring critical care in ICU. The reference values of these parameters have been taken from \[41–44\];

- c _i_ is the vaccination coverage, defined as the fraction of susceptible that get the vaccination. The reference values for the vaccination coverage cref,iare taken from \[45\] (see Sect. 2.3);

- _i_(t) is the time evolution of the vaccine effectiveness, computed by analysing the results reported in \[46\] (see Sect. 2.3);

- μiis the mortality rate, with reference values μref,itaken from \[47\]. The reference values of the model parameters are shown in Table 1. A representative stock- flow diagram showing how individuals move through compartments is shown in Fig 1. The integration of the Eqs 1–7 is carried out by using the standard real-valued variable- coefficient ordinary differential equation solver based on LSODE Fortran library
  PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782) March 9, 2023 4 / 17


* * *

Fig 1. Model scheme. Graphical scheme representing the flow of individuals among compartments.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g001)

ODEPACK++ \[48\]. We assume the following initial conditions (i.e., at t = 0) for the state variables: Si(0) = Ni−1000, Ii(0) = 1000, while the rest of state variables are null. We run the simulation of the epidemic over a time period of 100 days, which can be considered a representative
period for the duration of seasonal flu epidemics.

\\S\_{i}(0)=N\_{i}{-}1000,I\_{i}(0)=1000

2.2. Contact matrix

Table 1. Model parameters.

2.2. Contact matrix
Our model incorporates the impact of social mixing patterns (see Eqs 1 and 2) by means of the
contact matrices provided by \[33\] related to the Italian population. The matrices have been
numerically scaled according to the age structure considered in our model. As shown in \[33\],
the contact matrix Mijis computed as a linear combination of four contact matrices related to
the expected mixing patterns in different physical environments (household, school, workplace and in the general community), i.e.,
X

ð8Þ

| Age class | Population $ N\_{i} $ | $ C\_{\\mathrm{ref},i} $ | $ a\_{i} $ | $ b\_{i} $ | $ p\_{i} $ | $\\mu\_{\\mathrm{ref},i} $ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0-4 years | 2,367,687 | 0.02657 | 0.34029 | 0.18648 | 1 | 0.00074 |
| 5-14 years | 5,594,529 | 0.02069 | 0.29472 | 0.29982 | 0.45 | 0.00028 |
| 15-64 years | 35,564,193 | 0.05522 | 0.16019 | 0.55326 | 0.3 | 0.0024 |
| 65+ years | 16,833,138 | 0.546 | 0.18449 | 0.67425 | 0.9 | 0.10814 |

K K
where α are the setting-specified coefficients of the linear combination \[33\] and δ indicates
the corrective factors introduced here to model the adoption of NPIs (see Sect. 2.4). For the

b\_{i}

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.t001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.t001)

* * *

Fig 2. Contact matrices. Contact matrices for the Italian population in different social settings (see the title above each panel). The rightmost panel shows the
total contact matrix obtained as a linear combination of the setting-specific matrices \[33\].

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g002)

purpose of our work, since the impact of the NPIs in the epidemic dynamic are environment
K
specific, we compute the coefficients α of the linear combination by analysing data provided
H S W G
by \[33\]. The resulting coefficients are α = 0.29, α = 0.17, α = 0.24 and α = 0.3. These coefficients will be scaled according to the expected impact of the adopted NPI in the mixing patterns, as described in Sect. 2.4. Fig 2 shows the contact matrices related to the different social
settings, along with the overall contact matrix adopted in this work.

\\alpha^{\\mathrm{K}}

\\alpha^{}^{\\sf H{}=0.29,,\\alpha^{S}=0.17,\\alpha^{W}=0.24;{a n d};\\alpha^{G}=0.3}

ð9Þ

(\\epsilon\_{i}(t)

The time evolution of the effectiveness of the influenza vaccination (i(t), see Eqs 1 and 6) is
computed by analysing the averaged values of the vaccine effectiveness of the two influenza
subtypes H3N2 and H1N1 reported in \[46\]. In detail, \[46\] modelled influenza subtype-specific
vaccine effectiveness by time since vaccination among all ages and, specifically, for individuals
aged 65 years and older (see dotted lines in Fig 3). Due to the sparsity of data provided by \[46\],
we have tested different regression models in order to find the best fitting function by computing the adjusted R-squared metric to measure the goodness of fit. As results, we compute two
fourth degree polynomial fitting functions with an adjusted R2~0.99 (see dashed lines in Fig
3), expressed as follows:
6 4
ðtÞ ¼ 1:28 10 t4 þ 4:3 10 t3 0:056 t2 þ 3:01 t 0:64; ð9Þ

2.3. Vaccination

R^{2}{\\sim}0.99

ð10Þ

Taking into account the age-structure of the epidemic model presented in this paper, we
assume the same vaccine effectiveness time evolution for individuals younger than 65 years.

* * *

Fig 3. Time evolution of vaccine effectiveness. The dots indicate the time evolution of vaccine effectiveness by time
since vaccination among all ages and for individuals aged 65 years and older reported in \[46\]. Dashed lines denote the
least squares fitting functions of the data with fourth order polynomials.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g003)

2.4. Model calibration and description of scenarios

As previously mentioned, our analysis aims at exploring a wide range of scenarios in order
to infer the impact of control and prevention measures in the evolution of the epidemic, taking
into account different seasonal influenza severity. In order to define the potential occurrences
of the influenza in terms of seasonal severity, we consider the analysis carried out in \[49\], who,
on the basis of a literature review and of the opinion of a panel of experts, selected the six most
likely scenarios that synthesise the possible effects of an influenza outbreak. Out of the six scenarios selected in \[49\], we assume that the reference model, calibrated on the 2018/19 seasonal
influenza, is related to the scenario B shown in \[49\] (see their Fig 2). In terms of severity, we
assume that the reference model is considered as a moderate season. We consider two additional scenarios for the season severity, i.e., mild and severe season, assumed to be related to
scenarios A and E in \[49\], respectively. The severity of the season is modelled by changing the
transmission probability βiand mortality rate μiwith respect to the reference values βref,iand
μref,i(see Table 1). Taking into account the clinical attack and case fatality rates of the scenarios
presented in \[49\], we assume that the mild season is characterised by half of the transmission
probability and the same mortality rate with respect to the reference scenario, i.e., βmild,i= 0.5
βref,iand μmild,i= μref,i. The severe season is assumed to be characterised by a transmission

\\beta\_{\\mathrm{m i l d},i},=,0.5

\\beta\_{i}

\\mu\_{i}

\\mu\_{\\mathrm{r e f},i}

\\beta\_{r e f,i},\\mathsf{a n d},\\upmu\_{\\mathrm{m i l d},i},=,\\mumu\_{\\mathrm{r e f},i} probability 50% over the probability of the reference scenario, while the mortality rate is
assumed to be three times larger than the reference value, i.e., βsevere,i= 1.5 βref,iand μsevere,i= 3
μref,i.
Moreover, our analysis explores a set of scenarios aimed at investigating the impact of social

\\beta\_{\\mathrm{s e v e r e},i}!=!1.5,\\beta\_{\\mathrm{r e f},i}

\\mu\_{\\mathrm{r e f},i}.

Moreover, our analysis explores a set of scenarios aimed at investigating the impact of social
restrictions on population mixing by scaling the setting-specified contact matrices accordingly
(see Sect. 2.2). These measures are described as follows:

S

1. school closures: reduction of contacts at school by 50%, i.e., δ = 0.5,

\\delta^{\\mathsf{S}}!=!0.5,

2. partial lockdown: reduction of contacts at school, work and in the general community to
   S W G
   20%, i.e., δ = δ = δ = 0.2.

\\delta^{!S}!=!\\delta^{!W}!=!\\delta^{!G}!=!0.2.

K
When not otherwise specified, δ are assumed equal to unit values, with K = 1,...,4. Furthermore, we explore two additional scenarios to infer the impact of different Vaccination
Coverage (VC) with respect to the reference case (ci= cref,i, hereafter referred to as standard
coverage, see Table 1), i.e.:

\\delta^{K}

K!=\ 1,\ ..\ 4!.

(c\_{i}!=!c\_{\\mathrm{r e f},i},

1. no VC: ci= 0 for i = 1,...,4;

\\mathrm{V C};c\_{i},=,\\0{\\mathrm{f o r}},i=1,..,,4;

2. enhanced VC: coverage of 40% for individuals younger than 65 years, ci= 0.4 for i = 1,2,3
   and c4 = cref,4(see Table 1).

c\_{i}!=!0.4

c\_{4}\ c\_{\\mathrm{{f e f,4}}}

Finally, we consider an additional scenario to model the impact of the adoption of PPE and
the practice of hand hygiene, which are expected to cover a crucial role in limiting the spread
of airborne diseases (e.g., \[15\]). In this context, \[14\] observed a significant reduction of 75% in
the rate of ILI due to adoption of PPE and the practice of hand hygiene. Therefore, the impact
of these measures is modelled by reducing the transmission probability by 75% with respect to
the reference case, i.e., βPPE-hygiene,i= 0.25 βref,i.

\\beta\_{\\mathrm{P P E-h y g i e n e},i},=,0.25,\\beta\_{\\mathrm{r e f},i}

3. Results

In this Section we present outcomes of the epidemic dynamical simulations for the set of scenarios described above (see Sect. 2.4). The analysis is aimed at inferring the effectiveness of
control and prevention measures in the mitigation of the epidemics. In order to characterize
the outcome of the epidemic spread in the different scenarios, we will focus on the time evolution and the cumulative number of the infected and deceased individuals with respect to the
number of individuals at the end of epidemics. It is worth remembering that the end of epith
demics is assumed to be the 100 day after the beginning of the epidemic. The key advantage
of this approach is to analyse the relative trend of the epidemic evolution among different scenarios in order to figure out the impact of the different NPIs and vaccination campaign strategies and compare the effect of each measure in terms of the reduction of the number of
infected and deceased individuals.

3.1. Impact of vaccination

* * *

Fig 4. Impact of vaccination on the time evolution of the epidemic. Time evolution of the epidemics for different VC and influenza severity: (left) mild,
(center) moderate and (right) severe season. Please note that the scaling of the y-axis is different among each panel and the legend is shown on the right panel.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g004)

that vanishes after around 20 days from the beginning of the epidemics, except the case with
no VC, where the number of infected individuals requires a longer time to reach the peak with
respect to the other scenarios. In the case of moderate and severe seasons (see the central and
right panels of Fig 4), the number of infected individuals decreases to null values after about
70–80 days from the beginning of the epidemics. Therefore, the vaccination strictly affects the
overall time evolution of the epidemics, leading to a remarkable decrease of both the time peak
arrival and the number of infected individuals.
In order to evaluate the overall effect of vaccination, we compute the cumulative fraction of

In order to evaluate the overall effect of vaccination, we compute the cumulative fraction of
infected and deceased individuals at the end of the epidemic for each age class. Table 2 shows
the fraction of infected and deceased individuals with changing VC and season severity for
each age class. By averaging the fraction of infected and deceased individuals for each age class
over the three season severity scenarios, the absence of vaccination would lead to an increase
of the fraction of infected (deceased) individuals by a factor ~~1.6 (~~ 1.5) for the age class 14
years, a factor ~~2.4 (~~ 2.2) for those aged 15–64 years and a factor ~~6.3 (~~ 5.7) among the elderly
with respect to the case of standard VC. The enhancement of the VC leads to a reduction of
the fraction of infected (deceased) individuals by a factor ~~24.8 (~~ 20.7) for individuals aged
less than 5 years, a factor ~~35.7 (~~ 36) for those aged 5–14 years, a factor ~~23.3 (~~ 22.3) for

\\leq14

|  |  | Mild season |  | Moderate season |  | Severe season |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| VC | Age class | I(%) | D(%) | I(%) | D(%) | I(%) | D(%) |
| No | 0-4 years | 1.12 | 0.004 | 81.2 | 0.36 | 95.1 | 0.64 |
| 5-14 years | 0.7 | 0.001 | 71.6 | 0.13 | 90.7 | 0.24 |  |
| 15-64 years | 0.62 | 0.009 | 51.2 | 0.83 | 74.8 | 1.81 |  |
| 65+ years | 8.02 | 3.59 | 99.4 | 47.9 | 100 | 59.8 |  |
| Standard | 0-4 years | 0.17 | 0.0008 | 30.5 | 0.14 | 80.5 | 0.54 |
| 5-14 years | 0.1 | 0.0001 | 24 | 0.045 | 76.3 | 0.2 |  |
| 15-64 years | 0.04 | 0.0006 | 7.5 | 0.12 | 44.3 | 1.07 |  |
| 65+ years | 0.16 | 0.08 | 3 | 1.69 | 29.4 | 17.6 |  |
| Enhanced | 0-4 years | 0.09 | 0.0004 | 0.47 | 0.002 | 3.92 | 0.02 |
| 5-14 years | 0.05 | 0.00008 | 0.27 | 0.0005 | 2.49 | 0.006 |  |
| 15-64 years | 0.02 | 0.0003 | 0.2 | 0.003 | 2 | 0.05 |  |
| 65+ years | 0.14 | 0.07 | 2 | 0.99 | 17.4 | 10.4 |  |

* * *

**P L O S O N E** 2021/22 Italian influenza scenario during SARS-CoV-2 outbreak

individuals with age in the range 15–64 years and a factor ~~1.6 (~~ 1.7) among the elderly with respect to the case of standard VC. As expected, the impact of standard vaccination is stronger for elderly people (age 65 years), reaching an average reduction over the three scenario of season severity of ~88% of the infected and deceased population with respect to the scenario without vaccination, while the reduction of infected and deceased non-elderly subjects reaches values of ~73% for those aged 15–64 years and of ~55% for infants and children. This is due to the relatively larger vaccina- tion coverage for elderly subjects (see Table 1). Moreover, the enhancement of the VC leads to a further reduction of the fraction of infected and deceases population among all age classes in the range between ~92% and ~97% with respect to the case without vaccination. By computing the cumulative fraction over all age classes, mild season epidemic evolution with standard VC shows similar results among all age classes compared to the one with enhanced coverage, with a cumulative fraction of infected people of around ~0.08% and ~0.06% with standard and enhanced coverage, respectively (see pink and blue lines in the left panel of Fig 4). For moderate seasons, the standard coverage leads to an infection reduction of ~87%, thus decreasing the cumulative fraction of infected individuals from ~67% (in the case of no coverage) to ~8.6% with respect to the total population. By enhancing the coverage, the infected fraction decreases up to ~0.72%. During severe season, the standard coverage produces a reduction of infection by ~47%. In detail, the cumulative fraction of infected people decreases from ~84% (in the case of no cover- age) to ~44% of the total population, while the enhanced coverage produces a further reduc- tion up to ~6.4%.

## 3.2. Impact of NPIs

In this Section we compare the impact of the adoption of single NPIs in the mitigation of the spread of disease with respect to the vaccination in moderate and severe seasons, taking into account, additionally, the combined effect of NPIs and vaccination. Fig 5 shows the time evo- lution of the total fraction of infected individuals during a moderate influenza season for dif- ferent VC and adopting different NPIs. By comparing the different evolution of the epidemic due to the adoption of single NPI (lines in each panel of Fig 5), it can be noticed that the peak of the infection is reached at different time after the beginning of the epidemics and the overall duration of the spread of the disease changes among the different scenarios. A standard VC leads to a reduction of the peak of the infection towards a value similar to the peak of the infec- tion in the case of no coverage with the adoption of lockdown and PPE—hand hygiene (com- pare blue and light blue lines in the left panel with the red line in the central panel of Fig 5).

**Fig 5. Impact of NPIs on the time evolution of a moderate influenza season for different VC. Time evolution of the epidemics during a moderate season**

including the effects of different NPIs (lines in each panel) and vaccination with (left) no, (center) standard and (right) enhanced coverage. Please note that the scaling of the y-axis is different among each panel and the legend is shown on the right panel. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g005)

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782) March 9, 2023 10 / 17

* * *

Table 3. Impact of the NPIs for different VC on the cumulative fraction of infected and deceased individuals during a moderate influenza season.

|  |  | No NPIs |  | School closure |  | Partial lockdown |  | PPE-hand hygiene |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| VC | Age class | I(%) | D(%) | I(%) | D(%) | I(%) | D(%) | I(%) | D(%) |
| No | 0-4 years | 81.2 | 0.36 | 46.6 | 0.2 | 1.4 | 0.006 | 59 | 0.26 |
| 5-14 years | 71.6 | 0.13 | 33.6 | 0.06 | 0.84 | 0.001 | 6.3 | 0.01 |  |
| 15-64 years | 51.2 | 0.83 | 34.6 | 0.56 | 2.22 | 0.03 | 4.5 | 0.07 |  |
| 65+ years | 99.4 | 47.9 | 97.4 | 47 | 45.4 | 21.4 | 29.6 | 14.05 |  |
| Standard | 0-4 years | 30.5 | 0.14 | 1.1 | 0.005 | 0.08 | 0.004 | 4.77 | 0.02 |
| 5-14 years | 24 | 0.045 | 0.7 | 0.001 | 0.04 | 0.00007 | 0.36 | 0.0006 |  |
| 15-64 years | 7.5 | 0.12 | 0.5 | 0.008 | 0.02 | 0.0004 | 0.14 | 0.002 |  |
| 65+ years | 3 | 1.69 | 1.5 | 0.72 | 0.12 | 0.05 | 0.12 | 0.05 |  |
| Enhanced | 0-4 years | 0.47 | 0.002 | 0.17 | 0.0007 | 0.07 | 0.0003 | 0.26 | 0.001 |
| 5-14 years | 0.27 | 0.0005 | 0.09 | 0.0002 | 0.03 | 0.00005 | 0.03 | 0.00006 |  |
| 15-64 years | 0.2 | 0.003 | 0.1 | 0.002 | 0.01 | 0.0002 | 0.01 | 0.0002 |  |
| 65+ years | 2 | 0.99 | 1.2 | 0.59 | 0.11 | 0.05 | 0.07 | 0.04 |  |

Cumulative fraction of infected (I) and deceased (D) individuals for moderate influenza season scenarios where different NPIs and VC are adopted.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.t003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.t003)

Moreover, the impact of the enhancement of the VC is similar to the effect produced by the
standard vaccination and school closures (compare the light red line in the central panel with
the red line in the right panel of Fig 5).
Table 3 shows the age-structured fraction of infected and deceased individuals with differ-

Table 3 shows the age-structured fraction of infected and deceased individuals with different NPIs and VC during a moderate influenza season.
In Fig 6 is shown the time evolution of the total fraction of infected individuals during a

In Fig 6 is shown the time evolution of the total fraction of infected individuals during a
severe influenza season for different VC and adopting different NPIs. Similarly, to the case of
moderate influenza season shown in Fig 6, the peak of infection is reached at different time
after the beginning of the epidemics and the overall duration of the spread of the disease
changes among the different scenarios. In the case of no coverage (see left panel of Fig 6), the
adoption of PPE, hand hygiene and partial lockdown leads to a larger reduction of infection
peak with respect to the one produced by standard VC (see the left and central panel of Fig 6),
contrary to what observed for moderate influenza season. Moreover, the impact of the
enhancement of the VC is similar to the effect produced by the combination of standard vaccination and the adoption of PPE and hand hygiene (compare the light blue line in the central
panel with the red line in the right panel of Fig 6). Moreover, in case of no and standard

Fig 6. Impact of NPIs on the time evolution of a severe influenza season for different VC. Time evolution of the epidemics during a severe season including
the effects of different NPIs (lines in each panel) and vaccination with (left) no, (center) standard and (right) enhanced coverage. Please note that the scaling of
the y-axis is different among each panel and the legend is shown on the right panel.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g006](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.g006)

* * *

Table 4. Impact of the NPIs for different vaccination coverage during a severe influenza season.

|  |  | No NPIs |  | School closure |  | Partial lockdown |  | PPE-hand hygiene |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| VC | Age class | I(%) | D(%) | I(%) | D(%) | I(%) | D(%) | I(%) | D(%) |
| No | 0-4 years | 95.1 | 0.64 | 81.6 | 0.55 | 13.6 | 0.09 | 87.7 | 0.6 |
| 5-14 years | 90.7 | 0.24 | 69.5 | 0.18 | 8.01 | 0.02 | 17.3 | 0.05 |  |
| 15-64 years | 74.8 | 1.81 | 67.6 | 1.63 | 11.05 | 0.26 | 11.8 | 0.28 |  |
| 65+ years | 100 | 59.8 | 100 | 59.8 | 82.5 | 49.3 | 62.1 | 37.2 |  |
| Standard | 0-4 years | 80.5 | 0.54 | 39.1 | 0.26 | 0.22 | 0.003 | 58.4 | 0.4 |
| 5-14 years | 76.3 | 0.2 | 30.7 | 0.08 | 0.11 | 0.0002 | 7.76 | 0.02 |  |
| 15-64 years | 44.3 | 1.07 | 18.2 | 0.44 | 0.1 | 0.002 | 3.34 | 0.08 |  |
| 65+ years | 29.4 | 17.6 | 14.9 | 8.91 | 0.51 | 0.3 | 1.26 | 0.75 |  |
| Enhanced | 0-4 years | 3.92 | 0.03 | 0.91 | 0.006 | 0.1 | 0.0007 | 1.1 | 0.007 |
| 5-14 years | 2.49 | 0.006 | 0.55 | 0.001 | 0.05 | 0.0001 | 0.09 | 0.0002 |  |
| 15-64 years | 2 | 0.05 | 0.86 | 0.02 | 0.04 | 0.001 | 0.05 | 0.001 |  |
| 65+ years | 17.4 | 10.4 | 10.1 | 6 | 0.5 | 0.28 | 0.31 | 0.18 |  |

Cumulative fraction of infected (I) and deceased (D) individuals for severe influenza season scenarios where different NPIs and VC are adopted.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.t004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782.t004)

coverage, Figs 5 and 6 shows that NPIs are useful in delaying the epidemic peak, while in case
of enhanced VC the adoption of NPIs do not affect the timing of epidemics. Table 4 shows the
amount of the overall reduction of the spread of epidemics with different NPIs and VC for different age classes during a severe influenza season.

4. Discussion

By averaging the results related to the three cases of VC for moderate (severe) influenza seasons, the impact of school closure leads to a reduction of the fraction of infected and deceased
population by a factor ~~2.3 (~~ 1.5) for individuals aged less than 5 years, a factor ~~2.8 (~~ 1.7) for
those aged 5–14 years, a factor ~ 1.7 (~1.4) for individuals with age in the range 15–64 years
and any reduction among the elderly with respect to the scenario without the adoption of any
NPIs.
Moreover, partial lockdown mitigates the spread of moderate (severe) seasonal influenza

Moreover, partial lockdown mitigates the spread of moderate (severe) seasonal influenza
epidemics by reducing the fraction of infected and deceased individuals by a factor ~~73 (~~ 12)
for individuals aged less than 5 years, a factor ~~107 (~~ 23) for those aged 5–14 years, a factor
~~28 (~~ 10) for individuals with age in the range 15–64 years and a factor ~~2.3 (~~ 1.7) among the
elderly with respect to the scenario without the adoption of any NPIs.
Finally, the adoption of PPE and the practice of hand hygiene during a moderate (severe)

Finally, the adoption of PPE and the practice of hand hygiene during a moderate (severe)
influenza season leads to a reduction of infected and deceased individuals by a factor ~~1.7
(~~ 1.2) for individuals aged less than 4 years, a factor ~~14 (~~ 7) for those aged 5–14 years, a factor ~~13 (~~ 8) for individuals with age in the range 15–64 years, and a factor ~~3.5 (~~ 2.3) among
the elderly with respect to the scenario without the adoption of any NPIs. Therefore, by considering each age class, partial lockdown is the most effective measure in containing the epidemic, especially for individuals aged less than 64 years. By contrast, PPE and hand practice
hygiene are the most effective NPIs for elderly individuals for all the cases of season severity.
By considering the total population regardless of age classes, our results show that the adop-

Finally, the adoption of PPE and the practice of hand hygiene during a moderate (severe)
influenza season leads to a reduction of infected and deceased individuals by a factor ~~1.7
(~~ 1.2) for individuals aged less than 4 years, a factor ~~14 (~~ 7) for those aged 5–14 years, a factor ~~13 (~~ 8) for individuals with age in the range 15–64 years, and a factor ~~3.5 (~~ 2.3) among
the elderly with respect to the scenario without the adoption of any NPIs. Therefore, by considering each age class, partial lockdown is the most effective measure in containing the epidemic, especially for individuals aged less than 64 years. By contrast, PPE and hand practice
hygiene are the most effective NPIs for elderly individuals for all the cases of season severity.
By considering the total population regardless of age classes, our results show that the adop-

* * *

**P L O S O N E** 2021/22 Italian influenza scenario during SARS-CoV-2 outbreak

However, as mentioned in Sect. 3.1, the impact of vaccination with a standard coverage leads to a reduction of ~~87% (~~ 95%) of the total fraction of infected (deceased) individuals with respect to the scenario without any vaccination and NPI. The reduction of the spread of the disease is therefore larger in the case a standard vaccination coverage is achieved with respect to the scenario where vaccination is not undertaken and with the adoption of NPIs, regardless of the nature of the NPI. An enhancement of the vaccination coverage further reduces the spread of the disease by limiting the cases of infected (deceased) individuals up to ~~98% (~~ 97%) with respect to the number of infected individuals in cases where vaccination campaigns are not undertaken. Therefore, in case of moderate influenza season, vaccination campaigns with, at least, a standard coverage make the adoption of NPIs unnecessary. However, in both cases of influenza severity, a further reduction of infected (deceased) indi- viduals up to 99% ( ~~100%) is obtained when standard vaccination is combined with the adop- tion of NPIs, regardless of which kind of NPI is adopted. In the case of severe influenza seasons and no vaccination, PPE and the practice of hand hygiene are still the most effective NPIs in terms of reduction of the total fraction of infected and deceased individuals, similarly to the case of moderate influenza season. In detail, the adoption of PPE and the practice of hand hygiene produce a reduction of infected (deceased) individuals by ~65% (~~ 41%), while partial lockdown leads to a reduction up to ~~63% (~~ 21%) with respect to the scenario without the adoption of NPIs. These results confirm that PPE and hand hygiene are valuable measures to reduce the spread of the disease without requiring any mass intervention such as lockdown. As mentioned in Sect. 3.1 a standard vaccination coverage in severe influenza season leads to a reduction of infected (deceased) individuals by ~~47% (~~ 69%), while the enhanced vaccina- tion produces a decrease of infected (deceased) individuals by ~~92% (~~ 84%). Therefore, in case of severe influenza season, the enhancement of the vaccination coverage is necessary to avoid the adoption of NPIs. Finally, by combining standard (enhanced) vaccination with the adoption of NPIs, we observe a further reduction of epidemic in the range between ~ 77% ( ~~95%) and ~ 99% (~~ 99%) for infected individuals and in the range between ~ 85% ( ~~90%) and ~100% (~~ 100%) for deceased individuals, regardless of the nature of the adopted NPI.

## 5\. Conclusion

The main aim of this paper is to attempt to answer the question of how currently adopted pub- lic health strategies are effective against the variety of expected scenarios of influenza in the upcoming season 2021/22. The exploration of these scenarios is needed in order to evaluate a more mindful adoption of NPIs and, possibly, a revision of currently adopted vaccination campaigns in order to prevent the spread of the epidemic by implementing appropriate vacci- nation campaigns and social interventions. To this aim, we have developed an age-structured SEIR model that includes the modelling of prevention and control measures, as well as the effect of social mixing patterns and the time evolution ofvaccine effectiveness in the epidemic dynamics. We present a thorough incidence analysis for three different scenarios of seasonal influenza severity under a number of hypo- thetical government intervention strategies (i.e. vaccination and NPIs). Based on the results of this study, vaccination campaigns with a standard coverage would produce a remarkable impact on the spread of the disease in the case of a moderate influenza season, making the adoption of NPIs unnecessary. On the contrary, NPIs are necessary in case of severe seasonal epidemics, where a standard vaccination coverage would not be sufficiently effective in fight- ing the disease. In this case, the combination of a vaccination with standard coverage and NPIs would lead to a significant containment of the disease. However, our results show that the

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782) March 9, 2023 13 / 17

* * *

**P L O S O N E** 2021/22 Italian influenza scenario during SARS-CoV-2 outbreak

enhancement of the vaccination coverage would reduce the need to adopt NPIs, thus limiting the economic and social impacts that NPIs might produce. Encompassing all the epidemic out- comes explored in this paper, it can be concluded that while the explored NPIs are effective in reducing the transmissions and mitigating the healthcare burden, it is clear that a vaccination campaign with a proper coverage is the only way to contain the epidemic. This approach suffers from some uncertainties that might affect our result. Firstly, the model assumes a population with no migration, births or deaths from causes other than the epidemic and assumes immunity to the disease upon recovery. Concerning the social mixing, the model is based on the setting-specific social interaction matrices provided by \[33\] which are related to four social settings (see Sect. 2.2. The adoption of NPIs that limit the social mix- ing due to public mobility restrictions (i.e., school closures and partial lockdown) are modelled through a rescaling approach (see Sect. 2.4). However, this approach might be simplistic since it does not take into account the adher- ence of individuals to such restrictions. By accessing data related to contact tracing for con- firmed cases and by carrying out large scale public surveys, the social mixing model adopted in this paper can be improved. Moreover, the model does not consider the stochastic factors, which can strongly influence the dynamics of the epidemic in the early and final stages, when there are a few numbers of infected individuals \[23\].

**Acknowledgments**

The Authors thank Dr. Caterina Rizzo, Dr. Francesca Cetrone and Dr. Andrea Pistorio for fruitful discussions and acknowledge the referees for constructive comments that improved this manuscript.

## Author Contributions

## Conceptualization: Maria Chironna, Elena Pariani.

## Data curation: Daniela Loconsole.

## Formal analysis: Giovanni Dipierro, Daniela Loconsole.

## Methodology: Giovanni Dipierro.

## Project administration: Stefano Pastore.

## Software: Giovanni Dipierro.

## Supervision: Jean Marie Franzini, Marco Volpe.

## Visualization: Giovanni Dipierro.

## Writing – original draft: Giovanni Dipierro.

## Writing – review & editing: Maria Chironna, Giancarlo Icardi, Elena Pariani.

**References**

**1.** Organization WH. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Available from: [https://www.who.int/](https://www.who.int/) emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019.
**2.** Soo R, Chiew CJ, Ma S, Pung R, Lee V. Decreased Influenza Incidence under COVID-19 Control Mea- sures, Singapore. Emerging infectious diseases. 2020 04;26.
**3.** Zhang T, Wang Q, Xie Y, Peng Z, Zheng J, Qin Y, et al. Impact of COVID-19 outbreaks and interven- tions on influenza in China and the United States. Nature Communications. 2021 05;12.
**4.** Organization WH. FluNet Summary. World Health Organization; 2020. from: [https://www.who.int/tools/](https://www.who.int/tools/) flunet/flunet-summary.
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782) March 9, 2023 14 / 17

* * *

05. Organization WH. Global influenza strategy 2019–2030. World Health Organization; 2019. Available
    from [https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241515320](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241515320).
06. Cowling B, Ali S, Ng T, Tsang T, Li J, Fong MW, et al. Impact assessment of non-pharmaceutical interventions against COVID-19 and influenza in Hong Kong: an observational study. Lancet Public Health.
    2020; 5:e279–e288.
07. Solomon D, Sherman A, Kanjilal S. Influenza in the COVID-19 Era. JAMA. 2020 08;324.
08. Lee Kyueun, Jalal Hawre, Raviotta Jonathan M, Krauland Mary G, Zimmerman Richard K, Burke Donald S, et al, Estimating the Impact of Low Influenza Activity in 2020 on Population Immunity and Future
    Influenza Seasons in the United States, Open Forum Infectious Diseases, Volume 9, Issue 1, January
    2022, ofab607, [https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofab607](https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofab607) PMID: 35024374
09. Rondy M, el Omeiri N, Thompson M, Levˆeque A, Moren A, Sullivan S. Effectiveness of influenza vaccines in preventing severe influenza illness among adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
    test-negative design case-control studies. Journal of Infection. 2017 09;75.
10. Reina J. Influenza vaccination in the time of SARS-CoV-2. Medicina Cl´ınica (English Edition). 2020
    12;156.
11. Goldman RD et al.; International COVID-19 Parental Attitude Study (COVIPAS) Group. Willingness to
    Vaccinate Children against Influenza after the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pandemic. J Pediatr. 2021
    Jan; 228:87–93.e2. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2020.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2020.08.005) Epub 2020 Aug 7. PMID: 32771480;
    PMCID: PMC7410815.
12. Bertoni L, Roncadori A, Gentili N, Danesi V, Massa I, Nanni O, et al. How has COVID-19 pandemic
    changed flu vaccination attitudes among an Italian cancer center healthcare worker? Hum Vaccin
    Immunother. 2021 Oct;p. 1–6.
13. Di Pumpo M, Vetrugno G, Pascucci D, Carini E, Beccia V, Sguera A, et al. Is COVID-19 a Real Incentive
    for Flu Vaccination? Let the Numbers Speak for Themselves. Vaccines. 2021; 9(3). Available from:
    [https://www.mdpi.com/2076-393X/9/3/276](https://www.mdpi.com/2076-393X/9/3/276).
14. Aiello AE, Perez V, Coulborn RM, Davis BM, Uddin M, Monto AS. Facemasks, hand hygiene, and influenza among young adults: a randomized intervention trial. PLoS One. 2012 Jan; 7(1):e29744. https://
    doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0029744 PMID: 22295066
15. Howard J, Huang A, Li Z, Tufekci Z, Zdimal V, van der Westhuizen HM, et al. An evidence review of
    face masks against COVID-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2021; 118(4). Available from: [https://www.pnas.org/content/118/4/e2014564118](https://www.pnas.org/content/118/4/e2014564118). [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas).
    2014564118 PMID: 33431650
16. Nakhaeizadeh M, Eybpoosh S, Jahani Y, Ahmadi Gohari M, Haghdoost AA, White L, et al. Impact of
    non-pharmaceutical interventions on the control of COVID-19 in Iran: A mathematical modeling study.
    Int J Health Policy Manag. 2021 Jun. [https://doi.org/10.34172/ijhpm.2021.48](https://doi.org/10.34172/ijhpm.2021.48) PMID: 34273920
17. Pandemic influenza preparedness plan. World Health Organization; 2015–03. Available from https://
    apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/44123.
18. WHO global influenza preparedness plan: the role of WHO and recommendations for national measures before and during pandemics. World Health Organization; 2005. Available from [https://apps](https://apps/).
    who.int/iris/handle/10665/68998.
19. Egger M, Johnson L, Althaus C, Sch¨oni A, Salanti G, Low N, et al. Developing WHO guidelines: Time
    to formally include evidence from mathematical modelling studies. F1000Research. 2017 08; 6:1584.
    [https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.12367.2](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.12367.2) PMID: 29552335
20. Panovska-Griffiths J, Kerr C, Waites W, Stuart R. In: Mathematical modeling as a tool for policy decision
    making: Applications to the COVID-19 pandemic; 2021.
21. Huang CY, Sun CT, Hsieh Jl, Lin H. Simulating SARS: Small-World Epidemiological Modeling and Public Health Policy Assessments. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation. 2004 10;7.
22. Jiang S, Wang K, Li C, Hong G, Zhang X, Menglin Shan, et al. Mathematical models for devising the
    optimal Ebola virus disease eradication. Journal of Translational Medicine. 2017 06;15.
23. Rizzo C, Lunelli A, Pugliese A, Bella A, Manfredi P, Tomba G, et al. Scenarios of diffusion and control of
    an influenza pandemic in Italy. Epidemiology and infection. 2008 03; 136:1650–7. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1017/S095026880800037X PMID: 18272019
24. Vargas-De-Le´on C. Modeling control strategies for influenza A H1N1 epidemics: SIR models. Revista
    Mexicana de F´ısica S. 2012 01; 58:37–43.
25. Tang B, Wang X, Li Q, Bragazzi N, Tang S, Xiao Y, et al. Estimation of the Transmission Risk of the
    2019-nCov and Its Implication for Public Health Interventions. Journal of Clinical Medicine. 2020 01.
    [https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9020462](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9020462) PMID: 32046137
26. Tang B, Bragazzi N, Li Q, Tang S, Xiao Y, Wu J. An updated estimation of the risk of transmission of the
    novel coronavirus (2019-nCov). Infectious Disease Modelling. 2020 02;5.

* * *

27. Yang H, Lombardi Junior L, Castro F, Yang A. Mathematical modeling of the transmission of SARS-
    CoV-2—Evaluating the impact of isolation in S˜ao Paulo State (Brazil) and lockdown in Spain associated with protective measures on the epidemic of CoViD-19. PLOS ONE. 2021 06; 16:e0252271.
28. Esposito D, Dipierro G, Sonnessa A, Santoro S, Pascazio S, Pluchinotta I. Data-Driven Epidemic Intelligence Strategies Based on Digital Proximity Tracing Technologies in the Fight against COVID-19 in Cities. Sustainability. 2021 01; 13:644.
29. Foppa I. In: Kermack W.O. and McKendrick A.G.: A seminal contribution to the mathematical theory of
    epidemics (1927); 2017. p. 59–87.
30. Kermack WO, McKendrick AG. Contributions to the mathematical theory of epidemics—II. the problem
    of endemicity. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology. 1991; 53(1):57–87. Available from: [https://www](https://www/).
    sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092824005800412.
31. Kerr CC, Stuart RM, Mistry D, Abeysuriya RG, Rosenfeld K, Hart GR, et al. Covasim: An agent-based
    model of COVID-19 dynamics and interventions. PLOS Computational Biology. 2021 07; 17(7):1–32.
    Available from: [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009149](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009149) PMID: 34310589
32. Omar OAM, Alnafisah Y, Elbarkouky RA, Ahmed HM. COVID-19 deterministic and stochastic modelling
    with optimized daily vaccinations in Saudi Arabia. Results Phys. 2021 Sep; 28:104629. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
    10.1016/j.rinp.2021.104629 Epub 2021 Aug 2. PMID: 34367890; PMCID: PMC8327613.
33. Fumanelli L, Ajelli M, Manfredi P, Vespignani A, Merler S. Inferring the Structure of Social Contacts
    from Demographic Data in the Analysis of Infectious Diseases Spread. PLoS computational biology.
    2012 09; 8:e1002673. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002673](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002673) PMID: 23028275
34. Prem K, Zandvoort Kv, Klepac P, Eggo RM, Davies NG, for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious
    Diseases COVID-19 Working Group C, et al. Projecting contact matrices in 177 geographical regions:
    An update and comparison with empirical data for the COVID-19 era. PLOS Computational Biology.
    2021 07; 17(7):1–19. Available from: [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009098](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009098) PMID: 34310590
35. Resident population by age, sex and marital status on 1st January 2019;. Available from: [https://demo](https://demo/).
    istat.it/.
36. Influenza Type A Viruses.; 2017. Available from: [https://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/influenza-a-virussubtypes.htm](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/influenza-a-virussubtypes.htm).
37. Calabr‘o G, et al. Valutazione di Health Technology Assessment (HTA) del vaccino antinfluenzale quadrivalente adiuvato: Fluad Tetra; 2021. Available from: [https://www.ijph.it/hta-vaccino-antinfluenzalequadrivalente-adiuvato-fluad-tetra](https://www.ijph.it/hta-vaccino-antinfluenzalequadrivalente-adiuvato-fluad-tetra).
38. Flahault A, Letrait S, Blin P, Hazout S, M´enar´es J, Valleron AJ. Modelling the 1985 influenza epidemic
    in France. Statistics in medicine. 1988 11; 7:1147–55. [https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.4780071107](https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.4780071107) PMID:
    3201040
39. Longini I, Nizam A, Xu S, Ungchusak K, Hanshaoworakul W, Cummings D, et al. Containing Pandemic
    Influenza at the Source. Science (New York, NY). 2005 09; 309:1083–7. [https://doi.org/10.1126/](https://doi.org/10.1126/)
    science.1115717 PMID: 16079251
40. Ferguson N, Cummings D, Cauchemez S, Fraser C, Riley S, Meeyai A, et al. Strategies for containing
    an emerging influenza pandemic in Southeast Asia. Nature. 2005 10; 437:209–14. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1038/nature04017 PMID: 16079797
41. Meier CR, Napalkov PN, Wegmu¨ller Y, Jefferson T, Jick H. Population-based study on incidence, risk
    factors, clinical complications and drug utilisation associated with influenza in the United Kingdom. Eur
    J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2000 Nov; 19(11):834–842.
42. Sessa A, Costa B, Bamfi F, Bettoncelli G, D’Ambrosio G. The incidence, natural history and associated
    outcomes of influenza-like illness and clinical influenza in Italy. Fam Pract. 2001 Dec; 18(6):629–634.
43. Esposito S, Cantarutti L, Molteni C, Daleno C, Scala A, Tagliabue C, et al. Clinical manifestations and
    socio-economic impact of influenza among healthy children in the community. The Journal of infection.
    2011 03; 62:379–87. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2011.02.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2011.02.015) PMID: 21414357
44. Perrotta D, Bella A, Rizzo C, Paolotti D. Participatory Online Surveillance as a Supplementary Tool to
    Sentinel Doctors for Influenza-Like Illness Surveillance in Italy. PLOS ONE. 2017 01; 12:e0169801.
    [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0169801](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0169801) PMID: 28076411
45. Territorial Information System for health and wellbeing. Available from: [https://www.istat.it/it/archivio/](https://www.istat.it/it/archivio/)
47. Kissling E, Nunes B, Robertson C, Valenciano M, Reuss A, Larrauri A, et al. I-MOVE multicentre casecontrol study 2010/11 to 2014/15: Is there within-season waning of influenza type/subtype vaccine
    effectiveness with increasing time since vaccination? Euro Surveill. 2016 Apr; 21(16).
48. Rosano A, Bella A, Gesualdo F, Acampora A, Pezzotti P, Marchetti S, et al. Investigating the impact of
    influenza on excess mortality in all ages in Italy during recent seasons (2013/14-2016/17 seasons). Int J
    Infect Dis. 2019 Nov; 88:127–134. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2019.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2019.08.003) PMID: 31401203

* * *

**P L O S O N E** 2021/22 Italian influenza scenario during SARS-CoV-2 outbreak

**48.** Allan B, Lefantzi S, Ray J. ODEPACK++: refactoring the LSODE Fortran library for use in the CCA high performance component software architecture; 2004. p. 109–119.
**49.** Napoli C, Fabiani M, Rizzo C, Barral M, Oxford J, Cohen J, et al. Assessment of human influenza pan- demic scenarios in Europe. Euro Surveill. 2015 Feb; 20(7):29–38. [https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917). es2015.20.7.21038 PMID: 25719965
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0282782) March 9, 2023 17 / 17