RESEARCH ARTICLE

SARS-CoV-2 transmission with and without
mask wearing or air cleaners in schools in
Switzerland: A modeling study of
epidemiological, environmental, and
molecular data

OPEN ACCESS

1☯ 1☯
Nicolas BanholzerID, Kathrin Zu¨ rcher, Philipp JentID2, Pascal Bittel3, Lavinia Furrer3,
1,4,5
Matthias EggerID, Tina HascherID6, Lukas FennerID1\*

Citation: Banholzer N, Zu¨rcher K, Jent P, Bittel P,
Furrer L, Egger M, et al. (2023) SARS-CoV-2
transmission with and without mask wearing or air
cleaners in schools in Switzerland: A modeling
study of epidemiological, environmental, and
molecular data. PLoS Med 20(5): e1004226.
[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226)

Data Availability Statement: Restrictions on the
availability of personal data apply, but are
necessary to maintain the confidentiality of
participants. The data is available upon reasonable
request, contact: University of Bern, info.
[ispm@unibe.ch](mailto:ispm@unibe.ch). All other data are included in the
manuscript and accompanying supporting
information. Code is available at [https://github](https://github/).
com/nbanho/mcid.

Published: May 18, 2023

Academic Editor: Aziz Sheikh, Edinburgh
University, UNITED KINGDOM

Received: January 19, 2023

1 Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2 Department of
Infectious Diseases, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 3 Institute for
Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 4 Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and
Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 5 Population
Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 6 Institute of
Educational Science, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.

- [lukas.fenner@unibe.ch](mailto:lukas.fenner@unibe.ch)

Growing evidence suggests an important contribution of airborne transmission to the overall
spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), in particular
via smaller particles called aerosols. However, the contribution of school children to SARS-
CoV-2 transmission remains uncertain. The aim of this study was to assess transmission of
airborne respiratory infections and the association with infection control measures in
schools using a multiple-measurement approach.

Abstract

We collected epidemiological (cases of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)), environmental (CO2, aerosol and particle concentrations), and molecular data (bioaerosol and
saliva samples) over 7 weeks from January to March 2022 (Omicron wave) in 2 secondary
schools (n = 90, average 18 students/classroom) in Switzerland. We analyzed changes in
environmental and molecular characteristics between different study conditions (no intervention, mask wearing, air cleaners). Analyses of environmental changes were adjusted for
different ventilation, the number of students in class, school and weekday effects. We modeled disease transmission using a semi-mechanistic Bayesian hierarchical model, adjusting
for absent students and community transmission.
Molecular analysis of saliva (21/262 positive) and airborne samples (10/130) detected

Methods and findings

{\\mathrm{({O O}\_}}{

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

* * *

Funding: This study is funded by the
Multidisciplinary Center for Infectious Diseases,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. NB, LF, and
ME are supported by the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) through
cooperative agreement 5U01-AI069924-05. ME is
supported by special project funding from the
Swiss National Science Foundation (grant 32FP30-
189498). The funders had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.

Competing interests: I have read the journal’s
policy and the authors of this manuscript have the
following competing interests: ME serves on PLOS
Medicine’s editorial board. All authors have
declared that no competing interests exist.

232 ppm (± standard deviation). Daily average aerosol number concentrations without interventions were 177 ± 109 1/cm3 and decreased by 69% (95% CrI 42% to 86%) with mask
mandates and 39% (95% CrI 4% to 69%) with air cleaners. Compared to no intervention,
the transmission risk was lower with mask mandates (adjusted odds ratio 0.19, 95% CrI
0.09 to 0.38) and comparable with air cleaners (1.00, 95% CrI 0.15 to 6.51).
Study limitations include possible confounding by period as the number of susceptible

177\\pm1091/c m^{3}

Study limitations include possible confounding by period as the number of susceptible
students declined over time. Furthermore, airborne detection of pathogens document exposure but not necessarily transmission.

Conclusions

Molecular detection of airborne and human SARS-CoV-2 indicated sustained transmission
in schools. Mask mandates were associated with greater reductions in aerosol concentrations than air cleaners and with lower transmission. Our multiple-measurement approach
could be used to continuously monitor transmission risk of respiratory infections and the
effectiveness of infection control measures in schools and other congregate settings.

Author summary

Why was this study done?

• Public health authorities worldwide closed businesses and schools during the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.

• The closure of schools has been most intensely debated.

• The contribution of school children to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) transmission and the role of school rooms remain unknown.

What did the researchers do and find?

• We used molecular, environmental, and epidemiological data to understand the transmission of the virus causing COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) in 2 secondary schools (90 students) in Switzerland in the presence and absence of mask wearing and air cleaners.

• Aerosol and particle concentrations were on average 70% lower with mask mandates
and 40% lower with air cleaners.

* * *

**P L O S CMI NE DE I** SARS-COV-2 transmission and infection control measures in schools

## What do these findings mean?

- Molecular analyses indicated sustained airborne SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
- Mask wearing may be more effective than air cleaners in reducing aerosol concentra- tions and transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
- This approach can be used to assess transmission dynamics and the effectiveness of infection control measures in reducing transmission of respiratory infections during future epidemics.

## 1 Introduction

The spread of respiratory infections such as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and influenza is difficult to control \[1\]. Person-to-person transmission mainly occurs through exhaled respiratory particles containing the respective pathogen, par- ticularly via aerosols (defined as respiratory particles <100 μm \[2,3\]), rather than through larger droplets >100 μm. Multiple reports have provided evidence that a considerable part of SARS-CoV-2 transmission is likely to happen through small respiratory particles (<5 μm, also called fine aerosols), allowing for longer suspension times and airborne transmission at short (1 to 2 m) and long ranges (>2 m) \[4–6\]. Growing evidence suggests they contribute impor- tantly to the overall spread of SARS-CoV-2 in indoor congregate settings such as clinics, work- places, and schools \[3,6–8\]. Public authorities worldwide closed businesses and schools during the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic \[9,10\], but the closure of schools was particularly contentious. While the negative impact of school closures on student well-being and mental health is well documented \[11\], the role of children and adolescents in transmitting SARS-CoV-2 is less clear \[12\]. A study in Germany estimated that school contacts contributed between 2% and 20% to the overall transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the population \[13\]. Studies on the effec- tiveness of government interventions at the population level are inconclusive regarding the effects of school closures in different epidemic waves \[10,14\]. The introduction of compulsory face mask wearing \[13,15\] and improved ventilation \[15\] in schools was associated with a lower incidence of COVID-19. In addition, the installation of portable HEPA-air filtration devices (air cleaners) was shown to remove SARS-CoV-2 bioaerosols in a hospital ward \[16\]. Finally, a simulation study of exhaled SARS-CoV-2 bioaerosols in an indoor space demon- strated the efficacy of mask wearing and portable air cleaners in reducing aerosols \[17\]. We used a multiple-measurement approach to study the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viruses in school rooms. We hypothesized that our approach could demon- strate transmission (indicated by exposure to bioaerosols and epidemiological data) and that infection control measures (mask wearing and air cleaners) would reduce the concentration of aerosols and respiratory particles and lower the risk of infection for students in school rooms. We collected epidemiological (cases of respiratory diseases), environmental (CO2, aerosol, and particle concentrations), and molecular data (detection of respiratory viruses in bioaerosol and human saliva samples) over a seven-week study period from January to March 2022 in 2 sec- ondary schools in Switzerland. We analyzed changes in environmental and molecular charac- teristics and estimated the probability of infection with SARS-CoV-2 during 3 different study

PLOS Medicine \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226) May 18, 2023 3 / 18 conditions with and without infection control measures (general mask wearing and air
cleaners).

2 Methods

2.1 Study setting and design

We collected data in 2 secondary schools (age of students 13 to 15 years) over a seven-week
study period from January 24 to March 26 (School 1) and March 18 (School 2), 2022. Both
schools are located in the Canton of Solothurn, Switzerland, and have 1,500 (School 1) and 700
(School 2) students. Epidemiological data were collected in the 5 classes (School 1: classes A/B,
C; School 2: classes D, E), and environmental and molecular data were collected in 2 classrooms (School 1: A/B, School 2: D). In School 1, the same classroom was used by 2 classes A/B
due to half-class teaching. Fig 1 shows the schematic study setup. This study is reported as per
the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guideline (S1 Checklist).

2.2 Study interventions

We distinguished 3 conditions (Fig 2): (i) wearing face masks as mandated by the public health
authorities at that time (Mask mandate; typically Type II and Type IIR masks, although community masks were also allowed); (ii) standard condition following the lifting of mask mandates (No intervention); and (iii) environmental intervention using commercially available
portable HEPA- filtration devices (Air cleaner; Xiaomi Mi Air Pro 70m2, Shenzhen, China;
approx. USD 250 per device, running at 2 × 600 m3/h clean air delivery rate). Mask mandates
applied to all classes (including teachers) and were generally well adhered to. In School 2,
mask wearing continued for 1 week after the mandate was lifted (week 4). Air cleaners were
only installed in 2 classrooms with bioaerosol and environmental sampling. Passive window
ventilation occurred per recommendations of the national public health authorities during all
study conditions.

2\\times600;\\mathrm{m}^{3}/\\mathrm{h}

2.3 Data collection

Epidemiological data. At baseline, we collected aggregated data on age, sex, and COVID-
19 vaccination status in the participating classes. We inferred data on the number of suspected
and confirmed cases of COVID-19 based on the reported number of students absent from
school due to sickness probably related to COVID-19 (Text C and Tables A–E in S1 Appendix). Reports about absences were entered electronically into a REDCap database \[19,20\]. Both
schools participated in repetitive weekly testing for SARS-CoV-2. The saliva samples were
transported to the laboratory and stored at −80˚C until further processed \[21–23\].
Environmental data. CO2 and particle measurements. An air quality device (AQ Guard,

Bioaerosol sampling. We collected airborne respiratory viruses in the classroom with a
bioaerosol sampling device (BioSpot-VIVAS, Aerosol Devices, Ft. Collins, Colorado, United
States of America). This device samples airborne virus particles into a viral transport medium
(VTM) using a laminar flow water-based condensation method. In parallel, we also used the
Coriolis Micro Air (Bertin Instruments Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France) sampler, running at

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

{O{}\_{2}}

-80,^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

\ mathrm\\mathrm(P M,,\ {mathrm i,}\ {\\up p},\\mathrm M\_{1},,\ {\\up P}\\mathrm M\_{2.5},,,\ {\\up P}\\mathrm M\_{4},,{\\mathrm P M}\_{10},,{\\mathrm i}

<1,\\mathrm{t o}<10,\\upmu\\mathrm{m})

* * *

**P L O S CMI NE DE I** SARS-COV-2 transmission and infection control measures in schools

**Fig 1. Study setting. Schematic study setup of classrooms where environmental data was collected in each school. One air cleaner was placed in**

the front and the other in the back of classrooms. All devices were placed at the head level of students when they were seated. Both classrooms were not equipped with an active HVAC (heating, ventilation, air conditioning) system, but were ventilated using passive window ventilation. For School 1, ventilation was additionally assisted by a CO2 guided opener of a small window at the top. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g001)

200 l/min and collecting into 15 mL PBS as previously reported in clinic settings \[26\]. BioSpot- VIVAS operated throughout lessons while Coriolis Micro Air only operated shortly before and during break times to reduce noise exposure (approximately 60 min/day). The removable parts of both sampling devices were regularly autoclaved to avoid contamination. At the end of the day, samples were transported to the Institute for Infectious Diseases (IFIK) and stored at −80˚C. At the end of the study period, the Xiaomi HEPA filters were carefully removed and 20 swabs were taken from each filter and stored at −80˚C until further processed.

## 2.4 Laboratory and molecular analyses

Prior to the real-time (RT)-PCR analysis, daily bioaerosol samples were combined for each sampling device and filtered using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filters with Ultracel 10,000 Dalton molecular weight cutoffs filters (UFC9010; MilliporeSigma, Burlington, USA) to a vol- ume of 1 mL. The human saliva samples were directly analyzed without prior filtration. The Allplex RV Master Assay (Seegene, Seoul, South Korea) was used to detect a panel of 19 respi- ratory viruses (Text A in S1 Appendix), including SARS-CoV-2. Viral genome load (VGL) of specimens was quantified using standardized dilution series and reported in genomic equiva- lent copies/L. For positive samples, we performed targeted sequencing of viral RNA to com- pare genetic relatedness between SARS-CoV-2 strains detected in the air and human samples \[27\]. However, we were unable to amplify and sequence any of the gene targets in the bioaero- sol samples due to low RNA concentrations.

PLOS Medicine \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226) May 18, 2023 5 / 18

* * *

**P L O S CMI NE DE I** SARS-COV-2 transmission and infection control measures in schools

**Fig 2. Study design and community transmission during the study period. (a) Study conditions over the seven-week study period. (b)**

Number of new cases of COVID-19 across all age groups (7-day moving average) and the reproduction number (average of the median published estimate) in the Canton of Solothurn \[18\] over the study period. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g002)

PLOS Medicine \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226) May 18, 2023 6 / 18

* * *

**P L O S CMI NE DE I** SARS-COV-2 transmission and infection control measures in schools

## 2.5 Statistical analyses and modeling

**Number of new cases of COVID-19 by date of symptom onset.** The daily number of new cases of COVID-19 was inferred based on the number of students absent from school. Confirmed cases referred to absences due to a positive laboratory test result or isolation. Sus- pected cases referred to absences due to sickness probably related to COVID-19. Absences due to other known reasons were excluded. We used a probabilistic simulation approach (Text D in S1 Appendix) to estimate the number of suspected cases that were cases of COVID-19 and the date of symptom onset, which was not always reported by students. We generated 100 datasets for the daily number of new cases of COVID-19. Subsequent analyses were performed on each of these datasets and we report the mean of estimation results if not stated otherwise. Cases in teachers were excluded as teachers taught multiple classes and had different exposure. **Aerosol and particle concentrations.** We computed the average concentrations per day and compared these between study conditions. We report the mean ± standard deviation. We further estimated the reduction in concentrations using Bayesian log-linear regression models (Text H in S1 Appendix), adjusting for the ventilation rate (computed from indoor CO2 levels; see Text I in S1 Appendix), the daily number of students in class, school, and weekday effects. **Risk of transmission.** We estimated daily transmission of SARS-CoV-2 with a Bayesian semi-mechanistic hierarchical model \[9\] (Fig 3): (i) We modeled the number of new infections as a function of susceptible students in each class and day, where the probability of infection can vary by study condition. (ii) We adjusted the estimated effects of interventions for the daily proportion of all absent students and the effective reproduction number in the commu- nity. (iii) The number of new cases was computed as the weighted sum of the number of new infections in the previous days. (iv) The number of susceptible students was computed by removing the number of students who have already been infected. A detailed description of the transmission model and choice of priors for all model parame- ters are provided in Text E in S1 Appendix. Model parameters were estimated with a Bayesian approach (Text F in S1 Appendix). Specifically, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling was used as implemented by the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo algorithm with the No-U-Turn Sampler (NUTS) \[28\]. If not stated otherwise, we report posterior means and credible intervals (CrIs) based on the 50%, 80%, and 95% quantiles of the posterior samples, respectively. We estimated the total number of avoided infections for each intervention by computing the dif- ference between the estimated number of infections in the presence and absence of interven- tions (counterfactual scenario). **Software.** All analyses were performed in R software (version 4.2.0) \[29\] and modeling in Stan (version 2.21.0) \[30\]. The code is available from [https://github.com/nbanho/mcid](https://github.com/nbanho/mcid).

## 2.6 Ethics statement

The Ethics Committee of the Canton of Bern, Switzerland, approved the study (reference no. 2021–02377). For the saliva samples, we included all students who were willing to participate and obtained written informed consent from their caregivers.

## 3 Results

The study population consisted of 90 students (39 female, 51 male; Table 1). Of these, 27 stu- dents were fully vaccinated and 34 students had recovered from an infection within the last year. Over the seven-week study period (3,150 student-days in total), students were absent from school for 644 days (20% of total) of which 147 days (23% of absences) were due to isola- tion related to COVID-19, and 247 (38% of absences) were due to sickness. Overall, there were 35 confirmed and 73 suspected cases of COVID-19, exceeding the number of students in some

PLOS Medicine \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226) May 18, 2023 7 / 18

* * *

Fig 3. Visual summary of the structure of the Bayesian semi-mechanistic hierarchical model. (1) The number of new infections was
modeled as a function of the number of susceptible students, the class-specific daily rate of infections, and the reductions from active infection
control measures; (2) the effects of control measures were adjusted for transmission in the community and the proportion of students in class;
(3) the observed number of new cases was computed as the weighted sum of the number of new infections in the previous days; and (4) the
number of susceptible students was computed as the total number of students minus the cumulative sum of infections in the previous days.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g003)

classes (Table C in S1 Appendix). This suggests that only a proportion of suspected cases were
actual cases of COVID-19 as it is unlikely that students were infected twice. Accordingly, we
estimated the actual number of cases of COVID-19 across schools to be 55 (95% CrI 35 to 76).

3.1 Molecular analyses

We analyzed 262 saliva, 130 bioaerosol samples and swabs from the filters of air cleaners (20
swabs per filter) in 2 classrooms. Overall, there were 21 positive saliva and 10 positive airborne
samples. We detected SARS-CoV-2, adenovirus, and influenza virus (Table 2 and Tables A-B
in S1 Appendix). SARS-CoV-2 made up the vast majority of positive saliva (19 out of 21) and
bioaerosol samples (9 out of 10). We found 4 positive air-saliva samples in the same respective
week (3 SARS-CoV-2 and 1 adenovirus), suggesting they were paired samples. We also
detected SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses from the HEPA filters of the air cleaners. The
number of positive saliva and airborne SARS-CoV-2 samples per week varied by study condition (Fig 4A). Without interventions, the proportion of positive samples per week was 11.5%
for saliva and 8.1% for airborne samples. These proportions were lower with mask mandates
(saliva: 5.7%, air: 7.1%) and air cleaners (saliva: 7.7%, air: 5.0%). The weekly average viral concentration of positive samples was 0.6 copies/L. There were also differences in viral concentration between study conditions (Fig 4B). Without interventions, it was 1.1 copies per liter per
week, which was higher than with mask mandates (0.7 copies/L per week) and air cleaners (0.1
copies/L per week).

* * *

Table 1. Overview of the study population, number of COVID-19 cases, and person-days of absences.

|  | School 1 | School 2 | Total |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Students | 52(58%) | 38(42%) | 90(100%) |
| Sex |  |  |  |
| Female | 20(38%) | 19(50%) | 39(43%) |
| Male | 32(62%) | 19(50%) | 51(57%) |
| Vaccination status |  |  |  |
| Vaccinated | 16(31%) | 11(29%) | 27(30%) |
| Not vaccinated | 36(69%) | 27(71%) | 63(70%) |
| Recovery status |  |  |  |
| Recovered last year | 25(48%) | 9(24%) | 34(38%) |
| Not recovered | 27(52%) | 29(76%) | 56(62%) |
| Absent person-days | 334(52%) | 310(48%) | 644(100%) |
| Isolation | 109(33%) | 38(12%) | 147(23%) |
| Sickness | 95(28%) | 152(49%) | 247(38%) |
| Quarantine | 55(17%) | 5(2%) | 60(9%) |
| Other | 75(22%) | 115(37%) | 190(30%) |
| COVID-19 cases | 78(19%) | 30(13%) | 108(100%) |
| Confirmed | 25(32%) | 10(33%) | 35(32%) |
| Suspected | 53(68%) | 20(67%) | 73(68%) |

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.t001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.t001)

3.2 Analysis of aerosol and particle concentrations

Particle concentrations differed by study condition (Fig 5A). Aerosol number concentrations
were lower with mask mandates (mean 49 ± 52 1/cm3 standard deviation) and air cleaners (84
± 56 1/cm3) than without interventions (177 ± 109 1/cm3). Similarly, particle mass concentra-
−3
tions (e.g., PM1) were lower with mask mandates (2.0 ± 1.6 μgm) and air cleaners (3.8 ±
−3 −3
2.9 μgm) than without interventions (6.9 ± 4.1 μgm). Overall daily average CO2 levels were
1,064 ± 232 ppm. CO2 levels without interventions (953 ± 198 ppm) were slightly lower than
with mask mandates (1,155 ± 237 ppm) and air cleaners (1,088 ± 224 ppm), indicating
increased ventilation through outdoor air exchange (Fig I in S1 Appendix), although the differences in the daily proportion of time that windows were opened between no intervention and
mask mandates (0.03, 95% CrI −0.07 to 0.12) and between no intervention and air cleaners
(0.00, 95% CrI −0.11 to 0.11) were indistinguishable from zero. When adjusting for different
ventilation rates, the number of students in class, school effects, and weekday effects, the aerosol number concentration decreased by 69% (95% CrI 42% to 86%) with mask mandates and
by 39% (95% CrI 4% to 69%) with air cleaners (Fig 5B and Table H in S1 Appendix). The concentration of smaller particles (PM1 and PM2.5) was more reduced during mask mandates, and
the concentration of larger particles (PM4 and PM10) was more reduced during air cleaners.

49\\pm52,1/\\mathrm{c m}^{3}

(2.0\\pm1.6,\\up\\mu{\\mathrm{g m}}^{-3})

(177\\pm109,1/\\mathrm{c m}^{3}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

\\pm,56,1/\\mathrm{c m}^{3})

(6.9\\pm4.1,\\upmu\\mathrm{g m}^{-3})

(\\mathtt{e.g.,\\mathrm{P M}\_{l}})

2.9,\\upmu\\mathrm{g m}^{-3/}

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

(953\\pm198:\\mathrm{p p m})

1{,}064\\pm232,\\mathtt{p p m}.

The cumulative number of cases of COVID-19 increased considerably in all classes without
intervention and the large majority of students has been infected in School 1 by the time air
cleaners were installed, except for class D in School 2 (Fig 6A). Based on our Bayesian

(1{,}088\\pm224{,}\\mathtt{p p m})

\ \\mathrm\ (M\_{4}

\\mathrm{d},\\mathrm{P M}\_{2.5}

\\mathrm{P M}\_{10})

* * *

Table 2. Analysis of molecular data and the number of positive and negative saliva and airborne samples in each school.

|  | Saliva |  |  |  | Air |  |  |  | Air cleaner (HEPA filter$\\dagger$) |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | School 1 |  | School 2 |  | School 1 |  | School 2 |  | School 1 |  | School 2 |  |
| Total | 173 |  | 89 |  | 68 |  | 62 |  |  |  |  |  |
| Negative | 160 | (92%) | 81 | (91%) | 64 | (94%) | 56 | (90%) |  |  |  |  |
| Positive | 13 | (8%) | 8 | (9%) | 4 | (6%) | 6 | (10%) |  |  |  |  |
| Positive | 13 |  | 8 |  | 4 |  | 6 |  | 2 |  | 6 |  |
| SARS-CoV-2 | 12 | (92%) | 7 | (88%) | 4 | (100%) | 5 | (83%) | 2 | (100%) | 4 | (66%) |
| Influenza | 1 | (8%) | 0 | (0%) | 0 | (0%) | 0 | (0%) | 0 | (0%) | 1 | (17%) |
| Adeno | 0 | (0%) | 1 | (12%) | 0 | (0%) | 1 | (17%) | 0 | (0%) | 1 | (17%) |

† A total of 20 swabs were taken from each filter at the end of the study period.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.t002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.t002)

transmission model, the probability of getting infected was lower with mask mandates than
without interventions (adjusted odds ratio 0.19, 95% CrI 0.09 to 0.38), and comparable with
air cleaners (1.00, 95% CrI 0.15 to 6.51). Excluding suspected cases from the model, these
probabilities were similar for both mask mandates (0.21, 95% CrI 0.08 to 0.50) and air cleaners
(0.98, 95% CrI 0.14 to 6.74), although with greater uncertainty. Considering both confirmed
and suspected cases, mask mandates were associated with a considerable number of avoided
infections (9.98, 95% CrI 2.16 to 19.00), but not air cleaners (Fig 6B). As an additional analysis,
we used a modified Wells–Riley equation \[31\] and assumed that the change in the rate of emitted infectious quanta was proportional to the estimated reduction in the aerosol number concentration, while other parameters were kept constant under all study conditions (Text K in S1
Appendix). Accordingly, the daily risk of infection for a 6 h school day was 1.0% (95% CrI
0.4% to 1.9%) with mask mandates and 1.9% (95% CrI 1.0% to 3.0%) with air cleaners, compared to a 3.1% risk without interventions (Fig J in S1 Appendix).

Fig 4. Analysis of molecular data and comparison by study condition. (a) Proportion of positive airborne (solid line) and saliva (dashed
line) samples (average per week). (b) Viral concentration in positive airborne samples from BioSpot-VIVAS (average per week).

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g004) a

Mask mandate No intervention Air cleaner

b

Fig 5. Analysis of particle concentrations and comparison by study condition. (a) Boxplot of the daily average values for aerosol number
−3
concentration (CN in 1/cm3) and particle mass concentration (PM for particles of sizes <1 to <10 μm, respectively in μgm). Results for
CO2 and other environmental variables are provided in Text J in S1 Appendix. (b) Estimated reduction in aerosol number and particle mass
concentrations with interventions (posterior mean as dot and 50%, 80%, and 95% CrI as lines, respectively).

\\mathrm{C O\_{2}}

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g005)

4 Discussion

We collected epidemiological, environmental, and molecular data to estimate transmission of
respiratory infections in schools and assessed the association with infection control measures.
Airborne detection of SARS-CoV-2 documented sustained SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Bioaerosol SARS-CoV-2 concentrations with general mask mandates were lower, and SARS-CoV-2
was detected on the filters of air cleaners. Both interventions were associated with significantly
lower aerosol number and particle mass concentrations. The Bayesian transmission model
using epidemiological data estimated that mask mandates avoided SARS-CoV-2 infections,
but not air cleaners.
Our study demonstrated airborne detection of SARS-CoV-2 in schools. Although sampling

Our study demonstrated airborne detection of SARS-CoV-2 in schools. Although sampling
and molecular detection of infectious bioaerosols are challenging and there is no agreed standard \[16,32,33\], it provides important evidence on the airborne transmission of respiratory
pathogens. So far, viral RNA in airborne samples of SARS-CoV-2 was mainly found in hospitals and healthcare facilities \[34\]. A related study in 2 South African schools detected airborne
Mycobacterium tuberculosis \[35\]. Tuberculosis was the leading cause of death worldwide due
to an infectious disease prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. An improved understanding of airborne transmission and the effectiveness of interventions can benefit the control of both infectious diseases \[36\]. Our study provides evidence on airborne SARS-CoV-2 viral transmission
and the potential effects of interventions in schools based on airborne and saliva samples from
students. In our study, positive samples mostly pertained to SARS-CoV-2, but we occasionally
detected other respiratory viruses such as adenovirus and influenza. General public health
measures during the study likely suppressed the spread of other respiratory viruses. It also
must be noted that the detected viral concentrations were low, as shown by high cycle thresholds (CTs) in the RT-qPCR results. The molecular presence of other viral pathogens cannot be
excluded. The low sensitivity for detection of airborne pathogens by molecular assays is a welldocumented challenge \[16,33\].

* * *

**P L O S CMI NE DE I** SARS-COV-2 transmission and infection control measures in schools

**Fig 6. Analysis of epidemiological data and estimated transmission by study condition using the Bayesian hierarchical transmission**

**model. (a) Estimated mean cumulative number of cases for each school class after probabilistic simulation accounting for uncertainty in** suspected cases and the date of symptom onset (Text D in S1 Appendix). Dotted red lines indicate the number of students per class. A comparison of the estimated number of new cases after probabilistic simulation with the observed number of new confirmed and suspected cases is shown in Fig C in S1 Appendix. (b) Estimated number of avoided infections associated with interventions across schools (posterior mean as dot and 50%, 80%, and 95% CrI as shaded areas) based on the Bayesian hierarchical transmission model. Detailed estimation results are provided in Text G in S1 Appendix. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g006](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226.g006)

An experimental study demonstrated the effectiveness of infection control measures (uni- versal face mask wearing and air cleaners) using simulated exhaled SARS-CoV-2 bioaerosols in a closed indoor space \[17\]. In contrast, we studied infection control measures in a real-life setting and demonstrated their effectiveness using a multiple-measurement approach and obtain similar results. Our findings also align with existing evidence from population-level studies showing that the incidence of COVID-19 was lower in schools with mask use \[13,15\] and improved ventilation \[15\]. Similarly, a field study showed that adequate ventilation was associated with reduced incidence of tuberculosis, a strictly airborne disease, in a university building \[37\]. Altogether, these findings support arguments in favor of multiple intervention

PLOS Medicine \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226) May 18, 2023 12 / 18

* * *

**P L O S CMI NE DE I** SARS-COV-2 transmission and infection control measures in schools

strategies to address airborne transmission of respiratory infections in crowded indoor settings \[38\]. Indoor ventilation is one of the key determinants of airborne transmission \[2,3\], but schools are often poorly ventilated \[24,39\]. We showed that the concentration of both larger and smaller particles were lower with air cleaners, in line with findings about their effectiveness in hospitals \[16\] and simulated indoor environments \[17\]. The detection of viruses on the filters of air cleaners further supports the evidence on the effective removal of bioaerosols. However, it was difficult to estimate changes in transmission following air cleaners because they were installed at the end of the study period when presumably a large proportion of students were already infected with SARS-CoV-2. Furthermore, air cleaners could not prevent transmission outside the classrooms (e.g., during breaks and outside classes), which limits their effectiveness compared to masks that had to be worn in all indoor settings following the general mask man- date. In addition, physicochemical properties of aerosols, environmental factors, and the dis- tance to infectious people determine the survival of airborne particles and the loss of infectivity over time \[3\]. Thus, a predominance of close range high particle density aerosol transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in school settings could further explain why air cleaners were not associated with reduced transmission. Our study used portable, affordable air cleaners that could be implemented at scale, rather than large cleaners \[25\]. Noise exposure and a lack of acceptance by teachers \[40\] may still prevent their widespread use. Although not specifically assessed, we perceived good acceptance of our air cleaners during the short study period. Nev- ertheless, investments in professional building ventilation systems should be preferred to air cleaners in the long term \[41\]. School closures during the COVID-19 pandemic have been intensely debated as children and adolescents are particularly vulnerable to the negative impact of such interventions on their well-being and mental health \[11\]. Furthermore, numerous studies have examined the role of children in transmitting SARS-CoV-2 \[12\] and it remains unclear to what extent trans- mission of SARS-CoV-2 occurs in schools \[42\]. These findings contrast with studies of influ- enza viruses showing that school children may drive the seasonal influenza epidemic. Community studies in the US demonstrated that influenza transmission rates in children and adolescents were high in schools and that they easily transmit influenza viruses to household members and into their communities \[43–45\]. Our study suggests that also transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurs to a considerable extent in schools. Our study has several limitations. First, aerosol measurements and molecular detection of pathogens in bioaerosol samples document exposure, but not transmission and the direction of transmission (human to air, air to human). Nevertheless, paired saliva and airborne samples suggest that infected students exhaled infectious particles into the air, indicating a considerable transmission risk in the school rooms. Second, a comparison of viral concentration between study conditions should be interpreted with care due to the technical limitations of molecular detection in bioaerosol samples, and because the number of possibly infectious (and thus sus- ceptible) students decreased towards the end of the study. Third, our epidemiological analysis is based on observational data, thus subject to potential confounding, e.g., the incidence of COVID-19 (cases per week) in the community varied over the study period. However, levels were high throughout and included 2 Omicron subvariant peaks. Community transmission was also considered in our Bayesian transmission model. CO2 levels were not considered in the model but the levels were slightly lower without interventions, suggesting that lower venti- lation during intervention phases may have actually reduced the estimated effectiveness of mask mandates and air cleaners. Fourth, epidemiological data may not always be complete due to the underreporting of COVID-19 among absent students. We thus used a probabilistic approach to estimate the proportion of suspected cases being actual cases of COVID-19 and

PLOS Medicine \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226) May 18, 2023 13 / 18

* * *

**P L O S CMI NE DE I** SARS-COV-2 transmission and infection control measures in schools

the date of symptom onset where it was not reported. While this allows us to consider uncer- tainty in the observed data, the estimated effects of interventions will be less precise as reflected in larger uncertainty intervals. Fifth, the ordering of study conditions was the same across clas- ses, mainly because our study period coincided with the lifting of general mask mandates. The effectiveness of infection control measures may thus be affected by their timing. Future studies could vary the ordering of interventions in each class using a cross-over design. This would allow exploiting variation in the data between classes and reduce the influence of timing. Finally, our study design only allowed us to analyze variation within classes over time. We, therefore, did not analyze variation between classes, although we observed some differences such as lower CO2 levels and transmission in School 2. These differences may be explained by school-specific factors not measured in our study. In conclusion, using epidemiological, environmental, and molecular data, our study sug- gests that considerable transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurred in the participating schools. General face mask wearing was associated with reduced SARS-CoV-2 transmission and pre- vented infections. The effectiveness of interventions was supported by significant decreases in the concentration of aerosols. Taken together, our results suggest that infection control mea- sures can reduce the transmission of respiratory infections in school rooms. Future studies may use our multiple-measurement approach to assess the effectiveness of infection control measures in reducing the transmission of respiratory infections. Ideally, these data should be collected routinely in sentinel schools, thus continuously monitoring transmission risks and alerting health authorities when infection control measures should be taken.

## Supporting information

## S1 STROBE Checklist. STROBE Checklist.

(PDF)

## S1 Appendix. Supplementary information. Text A. Details on laboratory and molecular anal-

yses. Text B. Summary of case and molecular data. Text C. Longitudinal case data. Text D. Probabilistic simulation of case data. Text E. Estimating transmission and the effects of infec- tion control measures. Text F. Model parameter estimation. Text G. Detailed results from transmission model. Text H. Estimating changes in particle concentrations. Text I. Computing rebreathed air volume and ventilation rate. Text J. Results for changes in environmental vari- ables. Text K. Modeling transmission risk of SARS-CoV-2 using a modified Wells–Riley equa- tion. Fig A. Proportion of suspected cases being actual cases of COVID-19. Fig B. Empirical and fitted distribution for the delay from symptom onset to absence. Fig C. Comparison of reported and estimates cases of COVID-19. Fig D. Prior for the probability of getting infected without interventions. Fig E. Choices of prior for incubation period. Fig F Estimated incidence over time. Fig G. Model- and simulation-based estimates of the number of COVID-19 cases.

Fig H. Estimated number of avoided infections with interventions. Fig I. Boxplot of environ-

mental variables by school and study condition. Fig J. Estimated transmission risk using a modified Wells–Riley equation. Table A. Reported cases of COVID-19, saliva, and airborne samples in School 1. Table B. Reported cases of COVID-19, saliva, and airborne samples in School 2. Table C. Overview of the study population, number of COVID-19 cases, and person- days of absences in each study class. Table D. List of confirmed and suspected cases over the study period in School 1. Table E. List of confirmed and suspected cases over the study period in School 2. Table F. Prior choices for model parameters. Table G. Estimation results from transmission model. Table H. Estimated reduction in aerosol and particle concentrations with interventions. (PDF)

PLOS Medicine \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226) May 18, 2023 14 / 18

* * *

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the schools, teachers, and students participating in the study. We are
also grateful to the Educational Department of the Canton of Solothurn for their support
throughout the study. Finally, we are indebted to the student assistants who helped with the
data collection at the schools.

Author Contributions

Conceptualization: Kathrin Zu¨rcher, Tina Hascher, Lukas Fenner.

Data curation: Nicolas Banholzer, Kathrin Zu¨rcher, Philipp Jent, Lukas Fenner.

Formal analysis: Nicolas Banholzer, Kathrin Zu¨rcher.

Funding acquisition: Kathrin Zu¨rcher, Philipp Jent, Pascal Bittel, Tina Hascher, Lukas
Fenner.

Investigation: Nicolas Banholzer, Kathrin Zu¨rcher, Philipp Jent, Pascal Bittel, Lavinia Furrer,
Lukas Fenner.

Methodology: Nicolas Banholzer, Pascal Bittel, Lavinia Furrer, Matthias Egger, Lukas Fenner.

Project administration: Nicolas Banholzer, Kathrin Zu¨rcher.

Resources: Philipp Jent, Pascal Bittel, Matthias Egger, Tina Hascher, Lukas Fenner.

Software: Nicolas Banholzer.

Supervision: Lukas Fenner.

Validation: Nicolas Banholzer, Philipp Jent, Matthias Egger, Tina Hascher.

Visualization: Nicolas Banholzer, Kathrin Zu¨rcher, Lukas Fenner.

Writing – original draft: Nicolas Banholzer, Kathrin Zu¨rcher, Philipp Jent, Pascal Bittel,
Lavinia Furrer, Matthias Egger, Tina Hascher, Lukas Fenner.

1. Leung NHL. Transmissibility and transmission of respiratory viruses. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2021; 19
   (8):528–545. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00535-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00535-6) PMID: 33753932
2. Fennelly KP. Particle sizes of infectious aerosols: Implications for infection control. Lancet Respir Med.
   2020; 8(9):914–924. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30323-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30323-4) PMID: 32717211
3. Wang CC, Prather KA, Sznitman J, Jimenez JL, Lakdawala SS, Tufekci Z, et al. Airborne transmission
   of respiratory viruses. Science. 2021; 373(6558):eabd9149. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abd9149](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abd9149)
   PMID: 34446582
4. Coleman KK, Tay DJW, Tan KS, Ong SWX, Than TS, Koh MH, et al. Viral load of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in respiratory aerosols emitted by patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) while breathing, talking, and singing. Clin Infect Dis. 2022; 74
   (10):1722–1728. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab691](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab691) PMID: 34358292
5. Wang C, Pan R, Wan X, Tan Y, Xu L, Ho CS, et al. Immediate Psychological Responses and Associated Factors during the Initial Stage of the 2019 Coronavirus Disease (COVID- 19) Epidemic among the
   General Population in China. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020; 17(5):E1729. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
   3390/ijerph17051729 PMID: 32155789

References

* * *

06. Heneghan CJ, Spencer EA, Brassey J, Plu¨ ddemann A, Onakpoya IJ, Evans DH, et al. SARS- CoV-2
    and the role of airborne transmission: A systematic review. F1000Res. 2022; 10:232. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    12688/f1000research.52091.3
07. Greenhalgh T, Jimenez JL, Prather KA, Tufekci Z, Fisman D, Schooley R. Ten scientific reasons in support of airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Lancet. 2021; 397(10285):1603–1605. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1016/S0140-6736(21)00869-2 PMID: 33865497
08. Tellier R. COVID-19: The case for aerosol transmission. Interface Focus. 2022; 12(2):20210072.
    [https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2021.0072](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2021.0072) PMID: 35261731
09. Banholzer N, Lison A, O¨ zcelik D, Stadler T, Feuerriegel S, Vach W. The methodologies to assess the
    effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions during COVID-19: A systematic review. Eur J Epidemiol. 2022; 37:1003–1024. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-022-00908-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-022-00908-y) PMID: 36152133
10. Banholzer N, Ev W, Lison A, Cenedese A, Seeliger A, Kratzwald B, et al. Estimating the ef- fects of nonpharmaceutical interventions on the number of new infections with COVID-19 during the first epidemic
    wave. PLoS ONE. 2021; 16(6):e0252827. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0252827](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0252827) PMID:
    34077448
11. Loades ME, Chatburn E, Higson-Sweeney N, Reynolds S, Shafran R, Brigden A, et al. Rapid systematic review: The impact of social isolation and loneliness on the mental health of children and adolescents in the context of COVID-19. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2020; 59(11):1218–1239.e3.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2020.05.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2020.05.009) PMID: 32504808
12. Goldstein E, Lipsitch M, Cevik M. On the effect of age on the transmission of SARS- CoV-2 in households, schools, and the community. J Infect Dis. 2021; 223(3):362–369. [https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/)
    jiaa691 PMID: 33119738
13. Heinsohn T, Lange B, Vanella P, Rodiah I, Glo¨ ckner S, Joachim A, et al. Infection and transmis- sion
    risks of COVID-19 in schools and their contribution to population infections in Germany: A retrospective
    observational study using nationwide and regional health and education agency notification data. PLoS
    Med. 2022; 19(12):e1003913. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003913](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003913) PMID: 36538517
14. Sharma M, Mindermann S, Rogers-Smith C, Leech G, Snodin B, Ahuja J, et al. Understanding the
    effectiveness of government interventions against the resurgence of COVID-19 in Europe. Nat Commun. 2021; 12(1):5820. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26013-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26013-4) PMID: 34611158
15. Gettings J, Czarnik M, Morris E, Haller E, Thompson-Paul AM, Rasberry C, et al. Mask use and ventilation improvements to reduce COVID-19 incidence in elementary schools—Georgia, November 16–
    December 11, 2020. MMWR. 2021; 70(21):779–784. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7021e1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7021e1)
    PMID: 34043610
16. Conway Morris A, Sharrocks K, Bousfield R, Kermack L, Maes M, Higginson E, et al. The removal of airborne Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and other microbial bioaerosols by air filtration on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) surge units. Clin Infect Dis. 2022; 75(1):
    e97–e101. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab933](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab933) PMID: 34718446
17. Lindsley WG, Derk RC, Coyle JP, Martin SB, Mead KR, Blachere FM, et al. Efficacy of portable air
    cleaners and masking for reducing indoor exposure to simulated exhaled SARS-CoV-2 aerosols—
    United States, 2021. MMWR. 2021; 70(27):972–976. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7027e1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7027e1)
    PMID: 34237047
18. Scire J, Huisman JS, Angst D, Li J, Neher R, Maathuis M, et al.. Effective reproductive number (Re) in
    Switzerland; 2022. Available from: [https://github.com/covid-19-Re/dailyRe-Data](https://github.com/covid-19-Re/dailyRe-Data) \[last accessed 2022-\
    09-30\].
19. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture
    (REDCap)—A metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for pro- viding translational
    research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009; 42(2):377–381. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2008).
    08.010 PMID: 18929686
20. Harris PA, Taylor R, Minor BL, Elliott V, Fernandez M, O’Neal L, et al. The REDCap consortium: Building an international community of software platform partners. J Biomed Inform. 2019; 95:103208.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103208](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103208) PMID: 31078660
21. Galar A, Catala´ n P, Vesperinas L, Miguens I, Muñoz I, Garcı´a-Espona A, et al. Use of saliva swab for
    detection of Influenza Virus in patients admitted to an emergency department. Microbiol Spectr. 2021; 9
    (1):e00336–e00321. [https://doi.org/10.1128/Spectrum.00336-21](https://doi.org/10.1128/Spectrum.00336-21) PMID: 34431684
22. To KKW, Yip CCY, Lai CYW, Wong CKH, Ho DTY, Pang PKP, et al. Saliva as a diagnostic specimen
    for testing respiratory virus by a point-of-care molecular assay: A diagnostic validity study. Clin Microbiol
    Infect. 2019; 25(3):372–378. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2018.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2018.06.009) PMID: 29906597
23. Huber M, Schreiber PW, Scheier T, Audige´ A, Buonomano R, Rudiger A, et al. High efficacy of saliva in
    detecting SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR in adults and children. Microorganisms. 2021; 9(3):642. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.3390/microorganisms9030642 PMID: 33808815

* * *

24. Di Gilio A, Palmisani J, Pulimeno M, Cerino F, Cacace M, Miani A, et al. CO2 concentration monitoring
    inside educational buildings as a strategic tool to reduce the risk of Sars-CoV-2 airborne transmission.
    Environ Res. 2021; 202:111560. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.111560](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.111560) PMID: 34224708
25. Duill FF, Schulz F, Jain A, Krieger L, van Wachem B, Beyrau F. The impact of large mobile air purifiers
    on aerosol concentration in classrooms and the reduction of airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Int
    J Environ Res Public Health. 2021; 18(21):11523. [https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182111523](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182111523) PMID:
    34770037
26. Moore G, Rickard H, Stevenson D, Aranega-Bou P, Pitman J, Crook A, et al. Detection of SARS-CoV-2
    within the healthcare environment: A multi-centre study conducted dur- ing the first wave of the COVID-
    19 outbreak in England. J Hosp Infect. 2021; 108:189–196. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2020.11.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2020.11.024)
    PMID: 33259882
27. Goncalves Cabecinhas AR, Roloff T, Stange M, Bertelli C, Huber M, Ramette A, et al. SARS- CoV-2
    N501Y introductions and transmissions in Switzerland from beginning of October 2020 to February
    2021—Implementation of Swiss-wide diagnostic screening and whole Genome sequencing. Microorganisms. 2021; 9(4):677. [https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9040677](https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9040677) PMID: 33806013
28. Hoffman MD, Gelman A. The No-U-Turn Sampler: Adaptively setting path lengths in Hamilto- nian
    Monte Carlo. J Mach Learn Res. 2014; 15:1593–1623. [https://doi.org/10.5555/2627435.2638586](https://doi.org/10.5555/2627435.2638586)
29. R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
    Computing; 2022. Available from: [https://www.R-project.org/](https://www.r-project.org/) \[last accessed 2023-02-15\].
30. Carpenter B, Gelman A, Hoffman MD, Lee D, Goodrich B, Betancourt M, et al. Stan: A probabilistic programming language. J Stat Softw. 2017; 76:1–32. [https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v076.i01](https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v076.i01) PMID:
    36568334
31. Rudnick SN, Milton DK. Risk of indoor airborne infection transmission estimated from carbon dioxide
    concentration. Indoor Air. 2003; 13(3):237–245. [https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0668.2003.00189.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0668.2003.00189.x)
    PMID: 12950586
32. Santarpia JL, Rivera DN, Herrera VL, Morwitzer MJ, Creager HM, Santarpia GW, et al. Aerosol and surface contamination of SARS-CoV-2 observed in quarantine and isolation care. Sci Rep. 2020; 10
    (1):12732. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-69286-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-69286-3) PMID: 32728118
33. Stockwell RE, Ballard EL, O’Rourke P, Knibbs LD, Morawska L, Bell SC. Indoor hospital air and the
    impact of ventilation on bioaerosols: A systematic review. J Hosp Infect. 2019; 103(2):175–184. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2019.06.016 PMID: 31279762
34. Shen J, Kong M, Dong B, Birnkrant MJ, Zhang J. Airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in indoor environments: A comprehensive review. Sci Technol Built Environ. 2021; 27(10):1331–1367. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1080/23744731.2021.1977693
35. Bunyasi EW, Middelkoop K, Koch A, Hoosen Z, Mulenga H, Luabeya AKK, et al. Molecular detection of
    airborne Mycobacterium tuberculosis in South African high schools. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2022;
    205(3):350–356. [https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202102-0405OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202102-0405OC) PMID: 34752730
36. Rieder HL, Zwahlen M. Resurrecting historical lessons from tuberculosis research on air- borne transmission relevant to SARS-CoV-2. Swiss Med Wkly. 2021; 151(4748):w30096. [https://doi.org/10.4414/](https://doi.org/10.4414/)
    smw.2021.w30096 PMID: 34846112
37. Du CR, Wang SC, Yu MC, Chiu TF, Wang JY, Chuang PC, et al. Effect of ventilation improvement during a tuberculosis outbreak in underventilated university buildings. Indoor Air. 2020; 30(3):422–432.
    [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12639](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12639) PMID: 31883403
38. Morawska L, Allen J, Bahnfleth W, Bluyssen PM, Boerstra A, Buonanno G, et al. A paradigm shift to
    combat indoor respiratory infection. Science. 2021; 372(6543):689–691. [https://doi.org/10.1126/](https://doi.org/10.1126/)
    science.abg2025 PMID: 33986171
39. Santamouris M, Synnefa A, Asssimakopoulos M, Livada I, Pavlou K, Papaglastra M, et al. Experimental
    investigation of the air flow and indoor carbon dioxide concentration in classrooms with intermittent natural ventilation. Energy Build. 2008; 40(10):1833–1843. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2008.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2008.04.002)
40. Sanguinetti A, Outcault S, Pistochini T, Hoffacker M. Understanding teachers’ experiences of ventilation
    in California K-12 classrooms and implications for supporting safe operation of schools in the wake of
    the COVID-19 pandemic. Indoor Air. 2022; 32(2):e12998. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12998](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12998) PMID:
    35170085
41. Nardell EA. Transmission and institutional infection control of tuberculosis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect
    Med. 2016; 6(2):a018192. [https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a018192](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a018192) PMID: 26292985
42. Ulyte A, Radtke T, Abela IA, Haile SR, Berger C, Huber M, et al. Clustering and longitudinal change in
    SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence in school children in the canton of Zurich, Switzerland: prospective cohort
    study of 55 schools. BMJ. 2021; 372:n616. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n616](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n616) PMID: 33731327

* * *

**P L O S CMI NE DE I** SARS-COV-2 transmission and infection control measures in schools

**43.** Glezen WP, Couch RB, MacLean RA, Payne A, Baird JN, Vallbona C, et al. Inter-pandemic Influenza in the Houston area, 1974–76. N Engl J Med. 1978; 298(11):587–592. [https://doi.org/10.1056/](https://doi.org/10.1056/) NEJM197803162981103 PMID: 628375
**44.** Shang M, Blanton L, Brammer L, Olsen SJ, Fry AM. Influenza-associated pediatric deaths in the United States, 2010–2016. Pediatrics. 2018; 141(4):e20172918. [https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2918](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2918) PMID: 29440502
**45.** Fiore AE, Epperson S, Perrotta D, Bernstein H, Neuzil K. Expanding the recommendations for annual Influenza vaccination to school-age children in the United States. Pediatrics. 2012; 129(Supple- ment\_2):S54–S62. [https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011-0737C](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011-0737C) PMID: 22383482
PLOS Medicine \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004226) May 18, 2023 18 / 18