# Characterisation of Clostridium difficile Hospital Ward– Based Transmission Using Extensive Epidemiological

# Data and Molecular Typing

A. Sarah Walker
1,2. \*, David W. Eyre

1. , David H. Wyllie1, Kate E. Dingle
   1,3 , Rosalind M. Harding4, Lily O’Connor1, David Griffiths 1,5 , Ali Vaughan 1,5 , John Finney1, Mark H. Wilcox 6,7 , Derrick W. Crook 1,5 , Tim E. A. Peto 1,5 , on behalf of the Infections in Oxfordshire Research Database 1 National Institute for Health Research Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2 Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Unit, London, United Kingdom, 3 Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Oxford University, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4 Department of Zoology, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5 Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford University, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6 Department of Microbiology, The General Infirmary, Old Medical School, Leeds, United Kingdom, 7 Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom

Abstract

Background: Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and is endemic in hospitals, hindering the identification of sources and routes of transmission based on shared time and space alone. This may compromise rational control despite costly prevention strategies. This study aimed to investigate ward-based transmission of C. difficile, by subdividing outbreaks into distinct lineages defined by multi-locus sequence typing (MLST).

Methods and Findings: All C. difficile toxin enzyme-immunoassay-positive and culture-positive samples over 2.5 y from a geographically defined population of ,600,000 persons underwent MLST. Sequence types (STs) were combined with admission and ward movement data from an integrated comprehensive healthcare system incorporating three hospitals (1,700 beds) providing all acute care for the defined geographical population. Networks of cases and potential transmission events were constructed for each ST. Potential infection sources for each case and transmission timescales were defined by prior ward-based contact with other cases sharing the same ST. From 1 September 2007 to 31 March 2010, there were means of 102 tests and 9.4 CDIs per 10,000 overnight stays in inpatients, and 238 tests and 15.7 CDIs per month in outpatients/primary care. In total, 1,276 C. difficile isolates of 69 STs were studied. From MLST, no more than 25% of cases could be linked to a potential ward-based inpatient source, ranging from 37% in renal/transplant, 29% in haematology/ oncology, and 28% in acute/elderly medicine to 6% in specialist surgery. Most of the putative transmissions identified occurred shortly (#1 wk) after the onset of symptoms (141/218, 65%), with few .8 wk (21/218, 10%). Most incubation periods were #4 wk (132/218, 61%), with few .12 wk (28/218, 13%). Allowing for persistent ward contamination following ward discharge of a CDI case did not increase the proportion of linked cases after allowing for random meeting of matched controls.

Conclusions: In an endemic setting with well-implemented infection control measures, ward-based contact with symptomatic enzyme-immunoassay-positive patients cannot account for most new CDI cases.

Please see later in the article for the Editors’ Summary.

Citation: Walker AS, Eyre DW, Wyllie DH, Dingle KE, Harding RM, et al. (2012) Characterisation of Clostridium difficile Hospital Ward–Based Transmission Using Extensive Epidemiological Data and Molecular Typing. PLoS Med 9(2): e1001172. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001172 Academic Editor: Steven M. Opal, Brown University School of Medicine, United States of America Received August 5, 2011; Accepted December 28, 2011; Published February 7, 2012 Copyright: 2012 Walker et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. Funding: This work was supported by both the Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre and the UKCRC Modernising Medical Microbiology Consortium, with the latter being funded under the UKCRC Translational Infection Research Initiative supported by Medical Research Council, Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, and the National Institute for Health Research on behalf of the Department of Health (Grant G0800778) and The Wellcome Trust (Grant 087646/Z/08/Z). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Competing Interests: The institution of DWC and TEAP received per-case funding from Optimer Pharmaceuticals to support fidaxomicin trial patient expenses. DWC and TEAP also received honoraria from Optimer Pharmaceuticals for participation in additional meetings related to investigative planning for fidaxomicin. MHW has received honoraria for consultancy work, financial support to attend meetings and research funding from bioMerieux, Optimer, Novacta, Pfizer, Summit, The Medicines Company, and Viropharma. All other authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Abbreviations: CDI, Clostridium difficile infection; EIA, enzyme immunoassay; MLST, multi-locus sequence typing; ORH, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals; ST, sequence type

- E-mail: [asw@ctu.mrc.ac.uk](mailto:asw@ctu.mrc.ac.uk) . These authors contributed equally to this work.
  PLoS Medicine \| [www.plosmedicine.org](http://www.plosmedicine.org/) February 2012 \| Volume 9 \| Issue 2 \| e1001172

* * *

Introduction

Infection with Clostridium difficile is a leading cause of healthcareassociated diarrhoea, which is almost exclusively precipitated by
antibiotic exposure that disturbs the normal intestinal flora,
allowing C. difficile to flourish \[1\]. Following major hospital
outbreaks that resulted in high morbidity/mortality \[2,3\], C.
difficile infection (CDI) has become the focus of multi-faceted and
costly prevention strategies \[1,4\].
Rigorous implementation of these infection control measures is

Rigorous implementation of these infection control measures is
believed to have reduced disease incidence \[5,6\]; however, robust
evaluation of the impact of these control measures on person-toperson spread is largely lacking. Further, the infectious and
incubation periods of CDI are less well defined than for many
pathogens \[1\] for which much data illuminating transmission
arises from point-source outbreaks (e.g., norovirus \[7\], salmonella
\[8\], and HIV \[9\]) or challenge studies (e.g., typhoid \[10\], syphilis
\[11\], and malaria \[12\]). In contrast, CDI generally requires a
combination of pathogen acquisition, antibiotic exposure, and host
susceptibility \[13\], and so transmissions that do not immediately
result in disease can go undetected. A better understanding of
person-to-person spread is critical for promoting rational and costeffective control policies.
Here we study endemic CDI in a large geographical region over

Ethics Statement
This was a pre-specified

Methods

This was a pre-specified analysis within the Infections in
Oxfordshire Research Database, an anonymized linked electronic
database approved by the Oxford Research Ethics Committee
(09/H0606/85) and the National Information Governance Board
(5-07(a)/2009).

The Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals (ORH) NHS Trust (1,700 beds)
provides.90% of hospital care, and all acute services, to
,600,000 people residing in Oxfordshire, United Kingdom.
The Trust has two large sites in Oxford—the Churchill (medical
specialities, cancer centre; two floors) and John Radcliffe (acute
services, surgical specialities, women’s centre, children’s centre;
seven floors)—and a smaller district hospital 35 miles north of
Oxford (two floors). All ORH hospitals have discrete wards
containing 20–30 beds in 4–6 bedded bays with shared bathrooms
and only 2–4 side rooms: only a few specific wards (notably elderly
medicine) are all single rooms. The ORH microbiology laboratory
tests all stool samples from the region, including from other
healthcare facilities (smaller mental health and specialist orthopaedic trusts, and community hospitals) and general practitioners
(primary care). This population-based study included all CDI cases
identified from routine clinical samples at the ORH microbiology
laboratory from 1 September 2007 to 31 March 2010.
Throughout this period, the ORH hospitals operated a rigorous

Throughout this period, the ORH hospitals operated a rigorous
infection control policy (Table A in Text S1), which required

Setting
The Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals (ORH) NHS Trust (1,700 beds)

samples to be sent for C. difficile testing from any admitted patient
with diarrhoea (locally defined as $3 unformed stools, i.e., taking
the shape of the container, within 24 h), and for oral vancomycin
treatment to be initiated as first-line empiric therapy. Compliance
was monitored weekly by infection control staff, with immediate
feedback (Table A in Text S1). UK Department of Health policy
also required that all unformed stool samples from those aged
$65 y were sent to the laboratory be tested for C. difficile, whether
or not the patient met the above diarrhoea criteria and C. difficile
testing had been requested by the clinician sending the sample. All
samples were tested by enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for C. difficile
toxins A and B (Meridian Bioscience). EIA-positive samples were
cultured \[14\] and C. difficile isolates genotyped by multi-locus
sequence typing (MLST) \[14\]. A single colony from each sample
was typed, except for morphologically distinct colonies, which
were typed separately. EIA-positive, culture-negative isolates were
not considered in analysis; because culture is one of two gold
standards (the other being cell cytotoxicity \[15\]) and false EIApositive rates up to 20% are well recognised \[16\], these most likely
represent false positives.

Analysis
The first EIA-positive, culture-positive C. difficile sample of each
sequence type (ST) from each patient was included in the primary
analysis (55/927 \[6%\] patients had multiple CDI with different
STs). A network of ward-based contacts between cases, representing potential transmission events, was created for each ST
(Figure 1A). Links were made when two CDI cases shared time
on a ward, either (i) after the first case’s sample (the ‘‘donor’’) and
before the second case’s sample (the ‘‘recipient’’) (directional links),
or (ii) before both cases’ samples were taken (non-directional links)
(Figure 1B). As defined, ward-based contacts incorporated direct
person-to-person spread and indirect transmission via the
environment during shared ward exposure. For each link, we
defined the putative ‘‘minimum infectious period’’ as the time
between the first sample from the potential donor and ward
contact with the recipient. We defined the putative ‘‘incubation
period’’ as the time between this ward contact and the first sample
in the recipient. For a detailed description see Text S1. To avoid
double-counting when multiple possible donors had ward-based
contacts with the same recipient, we present the characteristics of
the most plausible transmission link, chosen assuming that donors
were most infectious closest to diagnosis (i.e., minimising the
putative infectious period) (see Figure B in Text S1 for results for
all links).
Two separate sets of networks were constructed. In the first,

Analysis
The first EIA-positive, culture-positive C. difficile sample of each

Two separate sets of networks were constructed. In the first,
contacts up to 26 wk from either donor or recipient—longer than
the currently accepted infectious and incubation periods \[1\]—
were allowed to inform the most likely infectious/incubation
periods. In the second set, incubation/infectious periods were
restricted based on results from the first set of networks, and we
included the possibility of transmission from the ward environment
after the donor was discharged. We defined the potential ward
contamination time as the time between donor discharge from and
recipient admission to the ward, allowing up to 26 wk, and
assuming direct ward contact was a more likely route of
transmission than ward contamination. The proportion of cases
that could be explained by credible ward-based transmission from
symptomatic EIA-positive, culture-positive patients was calculated
only for CDIs from 1 March 2008 to 31 March 2010, the ‘‘test’’
cases, to allow for new CDIs resulting from acquisition some time
previously. However, all samples during and after a 6-mo ‘‘run-in’’

* * *

Clostridium difficile Hospital Transmission

Figure 1. Ward-based links. (A) Ward-based links between cases of an example ST, ST-2. Cases from the first part of the study, 1 September 2007–

29 February 2008 (the run-in period, where the source of the cases may plausibly be before 1 September 2007), are shown as white circles, and cases from the remainder of the study, 1 March 2008–31 March 2010 (the test period) are shown in grey. Where patients with CDI shared time on a common ward before either or both patients’ CDI, links are indicated with solid or broken lines, representing possible transmission events for maximum allowable infectious and incubation periods of 8 and 12 wk, respectively. All potential ward-based transmission links are included; the single most plausible link to each recipient based on minimising infectious period is shown in solid lines. Links arising from ward contamination persisting after discharge of the donor patients are not shown. Letters indicate wards on which contact events occurred; wards that are related by specialty have the same letter but different numbers. Links of known direction (ward contact after potential donor CDI and before recipient CDI) are indicated with an arrowhead. Cases are approximately evenly spaced, with linked cases adjacent for the purpose of illustration (i.e., the distance between circles does not generally correspond to any physical quantity). (B) Schema showing different types of ward-based contact. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001172.g001

PLoS Medicine \| [www.plosmedicine.org](http://www.plosmedicine.org/) February 2012 \| Volume 9 \| Issue 2 \| e1001172 period, 1 September 2007–29 February 2008, were considered as
possible donors to ‘‘test’’ cases.

Sensitivity Analysis
One key assumption is choosing the most plausible potential

One key assumption is choosing the most plausible potential
transmission link based on minimising infectious periods; analyses
were therefore repeated with the alternative assumption of
minimising incubation periods. Some patients had successive
EIA-positive samples with the same ST. Assuming these represent
on-going diarrhoea due to the same infection, in a further
sensitivity analysis donor infectious periods were calculated relative
to their most recent (rather than their first) EIA-positive sample
with this ST prior to the ward contact. To estimate the effect of
missing cases, not detected as part of routine testing, the analysis
was repeated after randomly removing cases from the complete
dataset. Networks were regenerated and the proportion of the
remaining cases with a credible ward-based donor calculated.
Between 5% and 50% of the original cases were removed, with
1,000 repetitions undertaken for each 5% increment. Extrapolation of the results was used to estimate the possible effect of missing
cases.

Controls
To calculate the proportion of links between cases that might be

Controls
To calculate the proportion of links between cases that might be
the result of shared ward contacts occurring by chance rather than
actual transmission, ward-based networks were constructed for the
same number of patients without CDI for each ST, randomly
sampled 1,000 times. The main controls were patients with EIAnegative diarrhoea. The proportion of controls that could be
linked by shared time and hospital space was used to adjust the
number of linked CDI cases for chance meetings merely due to
movements around the hospital, and to therefore provide an
estimate of the proportion of cases linked by actual transmission.
(See Text S1 for other controls.)

Graphs and standard statistics were done using STATA 11.1.
Networks were drawn using NetworkX and Python Graphviz
libraries. Random samples were generated and networks analysed
using MySQL 5.1.

Samples and STs
From 1 September 2007 to 31 March 2010, 29,299 unformed
stool samples from 14,858 Oxfordshire patients were tested for C.
difficile: 102 tests per 10,000 overnight stays among ORH
inpatients and a mean of 30 and 208 samples per month from
day cases/outpatients/emergency department and non-ORH
locations, respectively (Figure A in Text S1). In total, 1,803
(6.2%) tests were EIA-positive, a rate of 9.4 CDIs/10,000
overnight stays among ORH inpatients and a mean of 2.8 and
12.9 CDIs/month from day cases/outpatients/emergency department and non-ORH locations, respectively (Figure A in Text S1),
with relatively little variation over the study period. 1,282 (4.4%)
tests were both EIA-positive and culture-positive, of which 1,276
(from 927 patients) were genotyped by MLST (Figure 2): 69
distinct STs were identified. 893 (70%) cases occurred in ORH
inpatients, of which 456 (51%) were admitted under acute/elderly
medicine, 152 (17%) general surgery, 68 (8%) renal/transplant, 52
(6%) haematology/oncology, 38 (4%) specialist surgery, 29 (3%)
trauma/orthopaedics, and the remaining 98 (11%) under other
smaller specialities.

Results

C. difficile isolates were grouped into a 6-mo run-in followed by a
2-y test period. Figure 3 shows when isolates of each ST occurred
over time, and suggests both temporal clustering and a large
number of sporadic cases. Figure 1A uses ST-2 (the most common
non-PCR-ribotype-027 ST) to illustrate the ward-based links that
could be made between same-ST cases. 55(6%) CDI cases had no
ORH exposure during the study and were excluded from further
analysis, since, by definition, no ward-based donor or onward
transmission can be identified.

Infectious/Incubation Periods
To include all links likely to represent true transmission, ward

Infectious/Incubation Periods
To include all links likely to represent true transmission, ward
contacts up to 26 wk from either case, longer than biologically
expected \[1\], were initially allowed. Figure 4 shows the
distribution of the minimum infectious/incubation periods from
the 218 most plausible of the 362 potential transmission links
where ward contact occurred between potential donor and
recipient CDI (directional links). Figure B in Text S1 shows all
possible links, with similar results. With 26-wk limits, of 705 test
cases from 1 March 2008 to 31 March 2010, 408 (58%) were
unlinked, 74 (10%) were donors of infection without an identified
source for their own infection, and 223 (32%) had a credible wardbased donor sharing the same ST, assuming no ward contamination persisted after discharge (Table B in Text S1).
Not all ward-based links between cases represent true

nation persisted after discharge (Table B in Text S1).
Not all ward-based links between cases represent true
transmissions, since two patients can meet by chance without a
transmission occurring. Consistent with this, the number of wardbased links with longer infectious/incubation periods approached
a constant background rate after 8–12 wk. Most time intervals
between potential donor CDI and putative onward transmission
(minimum infectious period) were #1 wk after the donor was
diagnosed (141/218, 65%), with the majority #4 wk (178/218,
82%), and few .8 wk (21/218, 10%) (Figure 4). The median
(interquartile range) minimum infectious period for the most
plausible directional potential transmission link was 1 (0–14) d,
compared with 4 (0–20) d and 8 (0–33) d for the most plausible
and all potential links, respectively. The most common incubation
period (from ward-based contact with donor to recipient CDI) was
#4 wk (132/218, 61%), with few .12 wk (28/218, 13%) after the
ward-based contact. The median (interquartile range) incubation
periods for the most plausible directional potential transmission
links, the most plausible links, and all potential links were 18 (8–42)
d, 24 (10–61) d, and 33 (13–74) d, respectively.

Proportion of Cases with a Credible Donor
Figure 5A shows the proportion of CDI cases with a credible

Proportion of Cases with a Credible Donor
Figure 5A shows the proportion of CDI cases with a credible
ward-based donor from final networks based on a 12-wk
maximum incubation period with no ward contamination
persisting beyond discharge. With an 8-wk maximum infectious
period, 465 (66%) of the 705 test cases were unlinked, and 165
(23%) had a credible ward-based donor sharing the same ST
(Table B in Text S1). The percentage of cases with a credible
donor was highest in renal/transplant (37%), haematology/
oncology (29%), and acute/elderly medicine (28%), with fewer
linked cases in general surgery (20%), trauma/orthopaedics (16%),
and other medical (13%) and surgical (6%) specialities. Increasing
the maximum allowable infectious period to 12 wk increased the
proportion with credible ward-based donors to,25%, whilst
decreasing the maximum allowable incubation period to 4 wk
decreased it to ,17%. The proportion of EIA-negative controls,
matched for exposure to other hospital patients, with ward-based
links to other controls using the same algorithm was,10%
(Figure 5A). These links provide an estimate of the proportion of
links among the CDI cases that were likely to have arisen by

* * *

Clostridium difficile Hospital Transmission

Figure 2. Samples and patients, 1 September 2007–31 March 2010. \* The number of unique patients with whom the index patient shared a

ward during the study period. \*\* 55 patients had multiple ST infections during the study period: 54 patients had two STs, and one had four STs. Six isolates were not successfully typed (either because of ambiguous sequences despite repeated testing or because of loss of sample). Note: 55 cases had no record of ORH inpatient admission during the study. Some patients had different ST infections in the test and run-in periods and are therefore counted in both. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001172.g002

chance meetings between patients as they moved around the Ward Contamination beyond Discharge hospitals, and suggest that a substantial minority of the possible Figure 5B shows the proportion of CDI cases with a credible transmission links seen in cases could actually be chance ward-based donor based on an 8-wk maximum allowable admissions to the same ward. After adjustment for chance infectious period and a 12-wk maximum allowable incubation meetings, a net 16% of cases are linked by probable transmission period, allowing for transmission from a ward after donor events. Varying other matching criteria, including diarrhoea-free discharge up to a maximum 26 wk. The numbers of links arising controls, produced results similar to those in Figure 5. from putative ward contamination increase similarly in CDI cases

PLoS Medicine \| [www.plosmedicine.org](http://www.plosmedicine.org/) February 2012 \| Volume 9 \| Issue 2 \| e1001172 and controls without CDI, giving few additional net linked cases
due to ward contamination after CDI case discharge. This suggests
that such links are more likely due to chance admissions of cases
with the same ST to the same ward rather than transmission from
persistent ward contamination.

Sensitivity Analyses
Results were similar when (i) restricting links to those where the

Sensitivity Analyses
Results were similar when (i) restricting links to those where the
point of potential transmission was known more precisely (0- to 1-d
ward contact durations only), (ii) minimising incubation rather
than infectious periods, and (iii) calculating infectious/incubation
periods relative to the most recent, rather than the first, donor
sample (Table 1).
Investigation of the impact of missing data showed that, under

Investigation of the impact of missing data showed that, under
plausible upper limits on the maximum allowable infectious/
incubation periods, the proportion of the remaining cases with a
credible donor fell from 23% to 22% if 10% of cases were
randomly removed, and to 18% if 30% of cases were removed
(Figure 5C). Extrapolation suggests that had the 4% of EIApositive samples not retrieved for culture actually had STs
obtained, the proportion of cases with a credible donor might
have been ,25%, rather than ,23%.

Discussion

Our uniquely large dataset of genotyped C. difficile isolates,
,20% of which were the hypervirulent PCR-ribotype-027/NAP-
1/BI/ST-1 strain, was obtained from patients in defined ward
locations, in a group of hospitals from a large UK NHS Trust
practising rigorous infection control. To our knowledge for the first
time for symptomatic C. difficile EIA-positive, culture-positive
cases, we have investigated (i) the proportion of cases attributable
to credible ward-based transmission from other symptomatic
cases, (ii) the time between CDI diagnosis and potential onward
transmission (denoted the minimum infectious period) and
between putative acquisition and CDI diagnosis (incubation
period) based on these putative transmissions, and (iii) the possible
impact on transmission of ward contamination persisting following
discharge of CDI cases. Crucially, our findings are based on data
collected over 2.5 y, and are thus less susceptible to biases inherent
during CDI outbreaks. Our CDI rates are all within the 3.8–9.5/
10,000 overnight stays typically observed in endemic settings \[1\],
our infection control policy is based on widely available guidance
\[4\], and our group of hospitals contains both specialist and general
hospitals typical of those found in the UK. We therefore believe
these findings should be generalisable to other endemic settings.

{mathbf\\mathbf y};

Figure 3. Time distribution of C. difficile cases, by sequence type. The first EIA-positive sample per ST per patient is plotted as a point for STs
other than ST-1 (PCR-ribotype-027), where the 207 cases are instead shown as a histogram per week. Secondary cases are those with an identified
credible donor based on incubation periods up to 12 wk and infectious periods up to 8 wk.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001172.g003

* * *

Figure 4. Distribution of infectious and incubation periods for
putative transmissions within 69 STs and 705 ‘‘test’’ CDI cases.
Only the most plausible transmission links, where the direction of
transmission is known (ward contact after potential donor CDI and
before recipient CDI), are plotted, assuming maximum allowable
infection and incubation periods of 26 wk and no ward contamination
persisting after donor discharge (see Figure B in Text S1 for distributions
from all potential links). Times are plotted rounded up to the nearest
week, e.g., intervals of 0–6 d are plotted as 1 wk.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001172.g004

Plausible ward-based transmissions were most commonly
observed during the week following the first EIA-positive sample.
This supports the current recommendations for immediate
isolation of symptomatic patients, and is consistent with evidence
showing that C. difficile shedding is most prominent during episodes
of diarrhoea \[17\]. Current guidance suggests isolation should
continue until 48 h after diarrhoea resolution \[4,18\]; our data
show that the potential for transmission persisted for up to 8 wk.
We found no evidence of substantial onward transmission from
wards after patient discharge; whilst this clearly can occur, our
data suggest the straightforward enhanced cleaning protocols used
were sufficient to prevent most environment-related transmission
occurring after CDI cases left wards. We could not distinguish
between direct person-to-person spread and indirect (spore-based)
transmission via the environment during shared ward exposure,
classing both as ‘‘ward contact’’.
Our data suggest that incubation periods most commonly last a

In our study no more than ,25% of patients with detected
symptomatic CDI could plausibly have acquired the infection
from other patients with EIA-positive symptomatic CDI via ward
contact. Chance meetings between patients, without transmission

transmission via the environment during shared ward exposure,
classing both as ‘‘ward contact’’.
Our data suggest that incubation periods most commonly last a
few days to 4 wk, but extending these up to 12 wk can provide
plausible ward-based transmission links. Previous studies have
been inconclusive. Cohort studies taking serial samples from
inpatients (likely receiving antibiotics) suggest a median 2–3 d
from first positive test to symptoms \[19–21\]; epidemiological
investigations showing that hospital exposure over the last 60 d is a
risk factor for community-onset disease suggest that incubation
periods may be considerably longer \[22\]. Providing exact limits is
complicated by the additional dependence of symptom onset on
antibiotic use, data not collected electronically in our hospitals and
therefore not available for this study. As well as informing
outbreak investigation, our data broadly support the current
surveillance definitions in recent Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America/Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines \[1\], which define cases occurring 0–4 wk post-discharge as
‘‘healthcare associated’’ and 4–12 wk post-discharge as having a
possible healthcare facility origin.

Panel A. Maximum allowable incubation period 12 weeks no ward contamination

Panel B. Maximum allowable infectious period 8 weeks and incubation period 12 weeks

Panel C. Missing data analysis with maximum allowable infectious period 8 weeks and incubation period 12 weeks

Figure 5. Percentage of cases explained by ward-based contact
with a C. difficile toxin EIA-positive donor. The circled dots indicate
a potential upper bound for the proportion of linked CDI cases. Controls
are drawn at random 1,000 times from hospital-exposure-matched EIAnegative patients; linked ward-based contacts for controls therefore
represent the proportion of ward-based contacts that would likely arise
in the CDI cases merely from chance movements around the hospitals.
Net linked cases correct the overall total linked CDI cases for these
chance ward meetings estimated from controls. (A) Maximum allowable
incubation period of 12 wk, no ward contamination. (B) Maximum
allowable infectious period of 8 wk and incubation period of 12 wk. (C)
Missing data analysis with maximum allowable infectious period of
8 wk and incubation period of 12 wk.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001172.g005

occurring, could mean that this 25% is in itself an overestimate.
Similarly, in a study of ten nosocomial pathogens, not including C
difficile, in an intensive care unit setting, investigators found that
only 15% of infections could be attributed to ward-based patientto-patient spread based on molecular typing \[23\]. As expected, the
proportion of CDI cases with identifiable donors varied according
to location/speciality, because of differences in risk of CDI
acquisition by susceptible patients, such as those on renal wards.
The fact that patients on our elderly medical wards are nursed in

* * *

Table 1. Summary of results and sensitivity analyses.

| Summary | Description | Result/Impact |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Analyses | Distribution of infectious and incubation periods | Most of the putative transmissions identified occurred shortly(≤1wk)after the onset of symptoms(141/218,65%),with few>8wk(21/218,10%) |
|  | Most incubation periods were≤4wk(132/218,61%),with few>12wk(28/218,13%) |  |
| Proportion of cases with a credible ward-based symptomatic EIA-positive source | No more than 25% of cases could be linked to a symptomatic EIA-positive ward-based inpatient source |  |
| Role of ward contamination after discharge of an infected case | Allowing for persistent ward contamination following ward discharge of a patient with CDI did not increase the proportion of linked cases after allowing for random meeting of matched controls |  |
| Sensitivity analyses | Alternative assumption: minimising incubation periods rather than minimising infectious periods | Similar results obtained for all analyses |
| Alternative assumption: incubation and infectious periods calculated relative to most recent EIA-positive sample rather than first EIA-positive sample |  |  |
| Analysis restricted to cases where point of transmission known more precisely(≤1d contacts) |  |  |
| Distribution of infectious and incubation periods compared including and excluding links to multiple possible donors(before and after pruning) |  |  |
| Choice of controls | Similar results for EIA-negative controls and diarrhoea-free controls matched for hospital exposure |  |
| Estimation of the impact of missing data by removal of observed cases at random | The proportion of the remaining cases with a credible donor fell from 23% to 22% if 10% of cases were randomly removed,and to 18%if 30% of cases were removed.Extrapolation suggests that if 10%-50% of true CDI cases had been missed,the proportion of cases with a credible ward-based donor would increase to<40% |  |

doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001172.t001

food \[26\] or animals \[27\]) with importation into the hospitals.
Since (i) 800–1,000 EIA tests were performed each month, (ii)
there was an ORH policy of universal testing of nosocomial
diarrhoea (Table A in Text S1), (iii) the same laboratory also
processed all community samples, and (iv) all unformed stool
samples from patients.65 y old were routinely tested for C.
difficile, large numbers of completely untested inpatient or
community symptomatic patients are unlikely. Our 6.2% C.
difficile EIA positivity rate is similar to the average 6.45% for 170
English hospitals in 2008 \[28\], suggesting we were unlikely to be
identifying many fewer EIA-positive cases than other typical UK
hospitals. The particular EIA assay used in our laboratory has an
independently reported sensitivity of 91.7% (84.7%–96.1%) \[29\]:
this relatively low sensitivity (common to all toxin EIAs \[16,24\])
makes it possible that ,10% of cases could have been missed
because of false-negative EIAs. However, because of widespread
concerns about test sensitivity, for most of the study period (to 31
December 2009), multiple diarrhoeal samples were submitted
from each patient, either simultaneously or serially, reducing the
chance of completely missing patients with symptomatic CDI.
Mixed CDIs could be another reason for missing cases, although it
is plausible that the most prevalent cultured strain that was

sequence typed would also be the one most likely to be
transmitted. Relatively low rates of mixed infection (2%–13%)
have been identified in previous investigations, most with limited
sample sizes, that examined multiple C. difficile colonies from single
faecal samples \[30–34\]. Extrapolation from Figure 5C suggests
that if the transmission behaviour of ,10%–20% missed cases
were similar to that of the observed cases, the proportion of linked
cases might be a few percentage points higher than 25%. In a
more extreme situation, where 50% of cases had been missed, the
proportion of linked cases would still be,40%. Unidentified
symptomatic cases might account for more transmission than
observed cases if they were more infectious, e.g., because of lack of
isolation. However, multiple transmissions over a short period of
time from an unidentified donor would result in ward-based
clusters of cases, which within our analysis would result in
recipients being falsely assigned as transmitting to each other.
While the true donor would remain unidentified, our analysis
would nevertheless classify any such transmissions as ward-based
and thus would capture a large proportion of such outbreaks in the
linked cases already reported. The high numbers of unlinked cases
thus suggests that increased transmission from unidentified
symptomatic cases is likely to be uncommon.
Asymptomatic carriage of C. difficile, whilst possibly protective numbers of unlinked cases argues against a significant proportion
of infection arising from a few highly infectious unidentified
carriers. However, as between 7% and 26% of adult inpatients
may be asymptomatic carriers of C. difficile \[1\], even if these
patients infect relatively few patients each, asymptomatic carriage
may be an important route of transmission, and requires further
investigation.
At the start of this study, and in common with the wider clinical

At the start of this study, and in common with the wider clinical
community \[1\], we had expected that the majority of CDI cases
would be attributable to in-hospital transmission from other
known symptomatic cases. Whilst the limitations discussed above
imply that total in-hospital transmission could be greater than inhospital transmission from this group, nevertheless, our findings
suggest that, contrary to prevailing beliefs, ward-based transmission from known EIA-positive symptomatic cases cannot account
for the majority of new CDIs. These are the only cases currently
visible to infection control teams, and therefore are the only cases
directly targeted by current infection control policies and practice.
Improved tests, such as those based on nucleic acid/PCR-based
methods, might improve detection rates \[36\], and it should be
noted that even infections arising from an unknown source are to a
certain extent preventable by measures such as good antimicrobial
stewardship \[4\].
The fact that we were able to divide 1,276 isolates into 69

stewardship \[4\].
The fact that we were able to divide 1,276 isolates into 69
distinct STs in the proportions given in Figure 2, with the number
of cases of each ST small enough to analyse as separate lineages,
suggests that MLST is reasonably discriminatory for identifying
transmission. The study was not powered to analyse the
transmission properties of each ST independently; therefore, more
data are required to comment on the extent to which the findings
may have varied with a different mix of prevalent strains. In
future, whole genome sequence data promise to provide further
insights; the isolates from this study are currently undergoing
whole genome sequencing to examine the microevolution of
transmitted strains of C difficile. Such data might refute the
possibility of transmission between epidemiologically linked cases
with the same ST that differ substantially at the whole genome
level, thus reducing the probability that chance ward meetings of
patients are misattributed as transmission events based on shared
STs. Also, genetically identical but apparently epidemiologically
unlinked cases may be identified, suggesting other routes of
transmission. Our heuristic analyses provide a foundation for more
sophisticated probabilistic models for C. difficile transmission,
which could incorporate transmission from unobserved cases.
In summary, in this endemic setting with well-implemented

References

In summary, in this endemic setting with well-implemented
infection control measures, up to three-quarters of new CDIs are
not easily explained by conventional assumptions of ward-based
transmission from symptomatic patients and so may not be
targeted by current interventions. A better understanding of other
routes of transmission and reservoirs is needed to determine what
other types of control interventions are required to reduce the
spread of C. difficile.

Supporting Information

1. Cohen SH, Gerding DN, Johnson S, Kelly CP, Loo VG, et al. (2010) Clinical
   practice guidelines for Clostridium difficile infection in adults: 2010 update by
   the society for healthcare epidemiology of America (SHEA) and the infectious
   diseases society of America (IDSA). Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 31: 431–455.

2. Loo VG, Poirier L, Miller MA, Oughton M, Libman MD, et al. (2005) A

3. Loo VG, Poirier L, Miller MA, Oughton M, Libman MD, et al. (2005) A
   predominantly clonal multi-institutional outbreak of Clostridium difficileassociated diarrhea with high morbidity and mortality. N Engl J Med 353:
   2442–2449.

4. McDonald LC, Killgore GE, Thompson A, Owens RC, Jr., Kazakova SV, et al.

5. McDonald LC, Killgore GE, Thompson A, Owens RC, Jr., Kazakova SV, et al.
   (2005) An epidemic, toxin gene-variant strain of Clostridium difficile.
   N Engl J Med 353: 2433–2441.


Text S1 Additional methods and results. Table A:
Interventions in place at the start of the study (1 September
2007), and changes during the study (through 31 March 2010).
Table B: Network characteristics. Figure A: C. difficile tests and
EIA-positive tests over the study period. Using 28-d de-duplication
(i.e., not counting repeat tests/positives within 28 d of an index
test/positive as a new event). Figure B: Distribution of infectious
and incubation periods for transmissions within 69 sequence types
and 705 test CDI cases. All potential transmission links where the
direction of transmission is known (ward contact after potential
donor CDI and before recipient CDI) are plotted assuming
maximum allowable infection and incubation periods of 26 wk
and no ward contamination persisting after donor discharge (see
Results for distributions from the most plausible links). Times are
plotted rounded up to the nearest week, e.g., intervals of 0–6 d are
plotted as 1 wk.
(DOC)

4. Vonberg RP, Kuijper EJ, Wilcox MH, Barbut F, Tull P, et al. (2008) Infection
   control measures to limit the spread of Clostridium difficile. Clin Microbiol
   Infect 14(Suppl 5): 2–20.
5. Muto CA, Blank MK, Marsh JW, Vergis EN, O’Leary MM, et al. (2007)
   Control of an outbreak of infection with the hypervirulent Clostridium difficile
   BI strain in a university hospital using a comprehensive ‘‘bundle’’ approach. Clin
   Infect Dis 45: 1266–1273.
6. Valiquette L, Cossette B, Garant MP, Diab H, Pepin J (2007) Impact of a
   reduction in the use of high-risk antibiotics on the course of an epidemic of
   Clostridium difficile-associated disease caused by the hypervirulent NAP1/027
   strain. Clin Infect Dis 45(Suppl 2): S112–S121.

Acknowledgments

We thank all the people of Oxfordshire who contribute to the Infections in
Oxfordshire Research Database, and Drs Madeleine Cule and Rory
Bowden from the Oxford University Department of Statistics for helpful
discussions.
The Infections in Oxfordshire Research Database Team is an oversight

(DOC)

The Infections in Oxfordshire Research Database Team is an oversight
group reviewing project proposals with independent representation from
various stakeholders. The Infections in Oxfordshire Research Database
Team consists of Philip Bejon, NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre;
Tony Berendt, Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre NHS Trust; Chris Bunch,
Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust; Derrick W. Crook, NIHR Oxford
Biomedical Research Centre; John Finney, NIHR Oxford Biomedical
Research Centre; John Gearing, community representative; Hywel Jones,
Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust; LilyPetoO’Connor, Oxford
Biomedical Research Centre; Tim E. A. (principalNIHR investigator),
NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre; Jean Robinson, community
representative; Brian Shine, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust; A.
Sarah Walker, NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre; Deborah
Waller, general practitioner, Beaumont St Surgery, Oxford; and David H.
Wyllie, NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre.

Author Contributions

Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: TEAP ASW DCW DWE MHW
RMH. Performed the experiments: DHW LOC KED DG AV JF.
Analyzed the data: DWE TEAP ASW. Wrote the first draft of the
manuscript: TEAP DWE ASW DWC. Contributed to the writing of the
manuscript: ASW DWE DHW KED RMH LOC DG AV JF MHW DCW
TEAP. ICMJE criteria for authorship read and met: ASW DWE DHW
KED RMH LOC DG AV JF MHW DCW TEAP. Agree with manuscript
results and conclusions: ASW DWE DHW KED RMH LOC DG AV JF
MHW DCW TEAP.

* * *

07. Zelner JL, King AA, Moe CL, Eisenberg JN (2010) How infections propagate
    after point-source outbreaks: an analysis of secondary norovirus transmission.
    Epidemiology 21: 711–718.

08. Glynn JR, Palmer SR (1992) Incubation period, severity of disease, and infecting

09. Glynn JR, Palmer SR (1992) Incubation period, severity of disease, and infecting
    dose: evidence from a Salmonella outbreak. Am J Epidemiol 136: 1369–1377.

10. Medley GF, Anderson RM, Cox DR, Billard L (1987) Incubation period of

11. Medley GF, Anderson RM, Cox DR, Billard L (1987) Incubation period of
    AIDS in patients infected via blood transfusion. Nature 328: 719–721.

12. Hornick RB, Greisman SE, Woodward TE, DuPont HL, Dawkins AT, et al.

13. Hornick RB, Greisman SE, Woodward TE, DuPont HL, Dawkins AT, et al.
    (1970) Typhoid fever: pathogenesis and immunologic control. N Engl J Med
    283: 686–691.

14. Magnuson HJ, Thomas EW, Olansky S, Kaplan BI, De Mello L, et al. (1956)

15. Magnuson HJ, Thomas EW, Olansky S, Kaplan BI, De Mello L, et al. (1956)
    Inoculation syphilis in human volunteers. Medicine (Baltimore) 35: 33–82.

16. Cook GC, Zumla A (2009) Manson’s tropical diseases, 22nd edition. Edinburgh:

17. Cook GC, Zumla A (2009) Manson’s tropical diseases, 22nd edition. Edinburgh:
    Saunders/Elsevier.

18. Wilcox M, Minton J (2001) Role of antibody response in outcome of antibiotic-

19. Wilcox M, Minton J (2001) Role of antibody response in outcome of antibioticassociated diarrhoea. Lancet 357: 158–159.

20. Griffiths D, Fawley W, Kachrimanidou M, Bowden R, Crook DW, et al. (2010)

21. Griffiths D, Fawley W, Kachrimanidou M, Bowden R, Crook DW, et al. (2010)
    Multilocus sequence typing of Clostridium difficile. J Clin Microbiol 48:
    770–778.

22. Planche T, Wilcox M (2011) Reference assays for Clostridium difficile infection:

23. Grundmann H, Barwolff S, Tami A, Behnke M, Schwab F, et al. (2005) How
    many infections are caused by patient-to-patient transmission in intensive care
    units? Crit Care Med 33: 946–951.

24. Eastwood K, Else P, Charlett A, Wilcox M (2009) Comparison of nine
    commercially available Clostridium difficile toxin detection assays, a real-time
    PCR assay for C. difficile tcdB, and a glutamate dehydrogenase detection assay
    to cytotoxin testing and cytotoxigenic culture methods. J Clin Microbiol 47:
    3211–3217.

25. Riggs MM, Sethi AK, Zabarsky TF, Eckstein EC, Jump RL, et al. (2007)
    Asymptomatic carriers are a potential source for transmission of epidemic and
    nonepidemic Clostridium difficile strains among long-term care facility residents.
    Clin Infect Dis 45: 992–998.

26. Rodriguez-Palacios A, Reid-Smith RJ, Staempfli HR, Daignault D, Janecko N,
    et al. (2009) Possible seasonality of Clostridium difficile in retail meat, Canada.
    Emerg Infect Dis 15: 802–805.

27. Gould LH, Limbago B (2010) Clostridium difficile in food and domestic animals:
    a new foodborne pathogen? Clin Infect Dis 51: 577–582.

28. Goldenberg SD, French GL (2011) Diagnostic testing for Clostridium difficile: a
    comprehensive survey of laboratories in England. J Hosp Infect 79: 4–7.

29. Wilcox MH, Eastwood K (2009) Evaluation report: Clostridium difficile toxin
    detection assays. London: NHS Purchasing and Supply Agency.

30. Broukhanski G, Simor A, Pillai DR (2011) Defining criteria to interpret
    multilocus variable-number tandem repeat analysis to aid Clostridium difficile
    outbreak investigation. J Med Microbiol 60: 1095–1100.

31. Tanner HE, Hardy KJ, Hawkey PM (2010) Coexistence of multiple multilocus
    variable-number tandem-repeat analysis subtypes of Clostridium difficile PCR
    ribotype 027 strains within fecal specimens. J Clin Microbiol 48: 985–987.

32. van den Berg RJ, Ameen HA, Furusawa T, Claas EC, van der Vorm ER, et al.
    (2005) Coexistence of multiple PCR-ribotype strains of Clostridium difficile in
    faecal samples limits epidemiological studies. J Med Microbiol 54: 173–179.

33. Wroblewski D, Hannett GE, Bopp DJ, Dumyati GK, Halse TA, et al. (2009)
    Rapid molecular characterization of Clostridium difficile and assessment of
    populations of C. difficile in stool specimens. J Clin Microbiol 47: 2142–2148.

34. Eyre DW, Walker AS, Griffiths D, Wilcox MH, Wyllie DH, et al. (2012)
    Clostridium difficile mixed infection and reinfection. J Clin Microbiol 50:
    142–144.

35. Shim JK, Johnson S, Samore MH, Bliss DZ, Gerding DN (1998) Primary
    symptomless colonisation by Clostridium difficile and decreased risk of
    subsequent diarrhoea. Lancet 351: 633–636.

36. Wilcox MH (2011) Laboratory diagnosis of Clostridium difficile infection: in a
    state of transition or confusion or both? J Hosp Infect 79: 1–3.

37. Planche T, Wilcox M (2011) Reference assays for Clostridium difficile infection:
    one or two gold standards? J Clin Pathol 64: 1–5.

38. Planche T, Aghaizu A, Holliman R, Riley P, Poloniecki J, et al. (2008) Diagnosis


one or two gold standards? J Clin Pathol 64: 1–5.
16\. Planche T, Aghaizu A, Holliman R, Riley P, Poloniecki J, et al. (2008) Diagnosis
of Clostridium difficile infection by toxin detection kits: a systematic review.
Lancet Infect Dis 8: 777–784.
17\. Best EL, Fawley WN, Parnell P, Wilcox MH (2010) The potential for airborne

17. Best EL, Fawley WN, Parnell P, Wilcox MH (2010) The potential for airborne
    dispersal of Clostridium difficile from symptomatic patients. Clin Infect Dis 50:
    1450–1457.

18. Department of Health (2009) Clostridium difficile infection: how to deal with the

19. Department of Health (2009) Clostridium difficile infection: how to deal with the
    problem. London: Health Protection Agency. 140 p.

20. Kyne L, Warny M, Qamar A, Kelly CP (2000) Asymptomatic carriage of

21. Kyne L, Warny M, Qamar A, Kelly CP (2000) Asymptomatic carriage of
    Clostridium difficile and serum levels of IgG antibody against toxin A. N Engl J
    Med 342: 390–397.

22. McFarland LV, Mulligan ME, Kwok RY, Stamm WE (1989) Nosocomial

23. McFarland LV, Mulligan ME, Kwok RY, Stamm WE (1989) Nosocomial
    acquisition of Clostridium difficile infection. N Engl J Med 320: 204–210.

24. Samore MH, DeGirolami PC, Tlucko A, Lichtenberg DA, Melvin ZA, et al.

25. Samore MH, DeGirolami PC, Tlucko A, Lichtenberg DA, Melvin ZA, et al.
    (1994) Clostridium difficile colonization and diarrhea at a tertiary care hospital.
    Clin Infect Dis 18: 181–187.

26. Palmore TN, Sohn S, Malak SF, Eagan J, Sepkowitz KA (2005) Risk factors for

27. Palmore TN, Sohn S, Malak SF, Eagan J, Sepkowitz KA (2005) Risk factors for
    acquisition of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea among outpatients at a
    cancer hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 26: 680–684.


* * *

Editors’ Summary

Background. Hospital-acquired infections are common and
occur when patients are infected with an organism found in
the hospital or health-care environment. Hospital-acquired
infections can sometimes cause no symptoms but often lead
to illness or even death. A leading hospital-acquired infection
is with the anaerobic bacterium Clostridium difficile, which
causes gastrointestinal problems, including diarrhea, leading
to severe illness and even death, especially in older patients
or patients who are already seriously ill. Between 7% and
26% of elderly adult inpatients in hospitals may be
asymptomatic carriers of C. difficile, and the spores that are
formed by this organism can live outside of the human body
for long periods of time and are notoriously resistant to most
routine surface-cleaning methods. Following major hospitalassociated outbreaks around the world, C. difficile infection
has become a prime target for expensive prevention and
infection control strategies.

Why Was This Study Done? Prevention strategies and
infection control measures have contributed to reducing the
incidence of C. difficile infection, however, to date, there have
not been any robust evaluations of the impact of such
strategies in reducing the spread of infection at the
individual level. In order to implement improved, costeffective policies, and to work out how to reduce incidence
even further, a better understanding of person-to-person
spread is crucial, especially as infection with C. difficile
depends on a combination of factors, such as antibiotic
exposure and host susceptibility. Therefore, the researchers
conducted this study to examine in detail the transmission of
C. difficile in hospital wards in order to give more insight and
information on the nature of person-to-person spread.

What Did the Researchers Do and Find? The researchers
used a population-based study in Oxfordshire, UK, to
investigate hospital ward–based transmission of defined C.
difficile strains from symptomatic patients by identifying C.
difficile infection from routine clinical microbiological
samples from 1 September 2007 to 31 March 2010.
Throughout this period, Oxfordshire hospitals operated a
rigorous infection control policy monitored by infection
control staff, in which stool samples for C. difficile testing
were taken from admitted patients with persistent diarrhea,
and from patients with any diarrhea who were 65 years or
older. The researchers tested all stool samples for C. difficile
toxins by enzyme immunoassay, cultured positive samples,
and genotyped C. difficile isolates by using multi-locus
sequence typing (to identify strains, that is, sequence types),
and finally, constructed networks of cases and potential
transmissions (by tracing contacts for up to 26 weeks) for
each sequence type identified.
In order to show which ward-based contacts potentially

period by measuring the time between the first infected
stool sample from the donor and ward contact with the
recipient, and calculated the incubation period as the time
between this ward contact and the first infected stool
sample in the recipient. To reduce the possibility of shared
ward contacts occurring by chance, the researchers used
patients with negative enzyme immunoassay stool samples
as controls to estimate how often such ward contacts
reflected actual transmission rather than chance.
Over the study period, almost 30,000 stool samples from

Over the study period, almost 30,000 stool samples from
almost 15,000 patients were tested for C. difficile, with 4.4%
(1,282) found positive for C. difficile in enzyme immunoassay
and culture. With genotyping, the researchers identified 69
strains (sequence types) of C. difficile. The researchers found
that the majority (66%) of cases of C. difficile infection were
not linked to known cases, and only 23% had a credible
ward-based donor sharing the same sequence type of C.
difficile. Furthermore, the researchers found that most
probable transmissions occurred less than one week after
the onset of symptoms, with a minority (10%) occurring after
eight weeks. Most incubation periods were less than four
weeks, but a few (13%) were more than 12 weeks.
Importantly, even after allowing for the random meeting of
matched controls and for persistent ward contamination, the
proportion of linked cases did not increase following ward
discharge of a C. difficile infection case.

What Do These Findings Mean? These findings show
that in an endemic setting with well-implemented infection
control measures, ward-based contact with symptomatic,
enzyme-immunoassay-positive patients cannot account for
most new cases of C. difficile infection. Crucially, these
findings mean that C. difficile infection might not be
effectively controlled by current strategies to prevent
person-to-person spread. Although the researchers were
able to distinguish different strains of C. difficile, there were
insufficient numbers of these different strains to deduce
whether the results they obtained might be different if there
was a different combination of strain types, that is, if some
strains were spreading more in hospitals than others. Finally,
in order to determine what other types of control
interventions are required to reduce the spread of C.
difficile, a better understanding of other routes of
transmission and reservoirs of infectivity is needed.

NThis study is further discussed in a PLoS Medicine
Perspective by Stephan Harbarth and Matthew Samore
NThe US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

NThe US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
provides information about C. difficile infection, as does
the UK Health Protection Agency
NThe World Health Organization has published a guide for

NThe World Health Organization has published a guide for
preventing hospital-acquired infections