RESEARCH ARTICLE

Characterizing changes in behaviors
associated with chemical exposures during
the COVID-19 pandemic

OPEN ACCESS

Citation: Herbstman JB, Romano ME, Li X,
Jacobson LP, Margolis AE, Hamra GB, et al. (2023)
Characterizing changes in behaviors associated
with chemical exposures during the COVID-19
pandemic. PLoS ONE 18(1): e0277679. [https://doi](https://doi/).
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679

Editor: Aaron Specht, Harvard School of Public
Health, UNITED STATES

Accepted: November 1, 2022

Data Availability Statement: The data used in this
analysis are maintained by the ECHO Data Analysis
Center, from which access may be requested. Per

Received: February 22, 2022

1☯ 2☯
Julie B. HerbstmanID \*, Megan E. RomanoID, Xiuhong Li3, Lisa P. Jacobson3, Amy
E. Margolis4, Ghassan B. Hamra3, Deborah H. Bennett5, Joseph M. Braun6, Jessie
P. BuckleyID7, Trina Colburn8, Sean Deoni9, Lori A. HoepnerID10, Rachel Morello-
FroschID11, Kylie Wheelock Riley12, Sheela Sathyanarayana13, Susan L. Schantz14,
1☯
Leonardo Trasande15, Tracey J. WoodruffID16, Frederica P. Perera, Margaret
2☯
R. KaragasID, on behalf of program collaborators for Environmental influences on Child
¶
Health Outcomes

1 Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New
York, NY, United States of America, 2 Department of Epidemiology, Dartmouth College Geisel School of
Medicine, Hanover, NH, United States of America, 3 Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, United States of America, 4 Department of Psychiatry,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United States of America, 5 Department of Public
Health Sciences, University of California—Davis, Davis, CA, United States of America, 6 Department of
Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health, Providence, RI, United States of America,
7 Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Baltimore, MD, United States of America, 8 Department of Child Health, Behavior, and Development,
Seattle Children’s Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States of America, 9 Department of Pediatrics, Rhode Island
Hospital, Providence, RI, United States of America, 10 Department of Environmental Health Sciences,
Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health and Department of Environmental and Occupational
Health Sciences, SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University School of Public Health, New York, NY,
United States of America, 11 Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of California—
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States of America, 12 Department of Environmental Health Sciences,
Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, Health, New York, NY, United States of America,
13 Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington and Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle,
WA, United States of America, 14 Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois—Urbana-
Champaign, Champaign, IL, United States of America, 15 Departments of Pediatrics and Population Health,
New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America, 16 Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA,
United States of America

The COVID-19 pandemic—and its associated restrictions—have changed many behaviors
that can influence environmental exposures including chemicals found in commercial products, packaging and those resulting from pollution. The pandemic also constitutes a stressful life event, leading to symptoms of acute traumatic stress. Data indicate that the
combination of environmental exposure and psychological stress jointly contribute to
adverse child health outcomes. Within the Environmental influences on Child Health Outcomes (ECHO)-wide Cohort, a national consortium initiated to understand the effects of
environmental exposures on child health and development, our objective was to assess
whether there were pandemic-related changes in behavior that may be associated with

¶ Membership of the Environmental influences on Child Health Outcomes is listed in the Acknowledgments.

- [jh2678@cumc.columbia.edu](mailto:jh2678@cumc.columbia.edu)

Abstract

* * *

ECHO policies, individuals requesting to use the
data should contact [ECHO-DAC@rti.org](mailto:ECHO-DAC@rti.org).

Funding: Research reported in this publication was
supported by the Environmental influences on
Child Health Outcomes (ECHO) program, Office of
The Director, National Institutes of Health, under
Award Numbers U2COD023375 (Coordinating
Center), U24OD023382 (Data Analysis Center),
U24OD023319 (PRO Core), and UH3OD023290
(Columbia University, New York, New York: Perera
FP, Herbstman JB); UH3OD023275 (Dartmouth
College, Hanover, New Hampshire: Karagas MR);
UH3OD023272 (University of Illinois, Urbana:
Schantz SL, University of California, San Francisco:
Woodruff T, University of California, Berkeley,
Morello-Frosch, R); UH3OD023271 (University of
Washington, Seattle: Karr C, Sathyanarayana S);
and UH3OD023313 (Memorial Hospital of Rhode
Island, Pawtucket: Deoni S, D’Sa VA; Brown
University, Providence,RI: Braun J). The funders
had no role in study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.

Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.

environmental exposures. A total of 1535 participants from nine cohorts completed a survey
via RedCap from December 2020 through May 2021. The questionnaire identified behavioral changes associated with the COVID-19 pandemic in expected directions, providing evidence of construct validity. Behavior changes reported by at least a quarter of the
respondents include eating less fast food and using fewer ultra-processed foods, hair products, and cosmetics. At least a quarter of respondents reported eating more home cooked
meals and using more antibacterial soaps, liquid soaps, hand sanitizers, antibacterial and
bleach cleaners. Most frequent predictors of behavior change included Hispanic ethnicity
and older age (35 years and older). Respondents experiencing greater COVID-related
stress altered their behaviors more than those not reporting stress. These findings highlight
that behavior change associated with the pandemic, and pandemic-related psychological
stress often co-occur. Thus, prevention strategies and campaigns that limit environmental
exposures, support stress reduction, and facilitate behavioral change may lead to the largest health benefits in the context of a pandemic. Analyzing biomarker data in these participants will be helpful to determine if behavior changes reported associate with measured
changes in exposure.

Introduction

As a result of COVID-19 lockdowns and restrictions, there have been many changes in behaviors and possibly in many environmental exposures associated with those behaviors. For example, air pollution levels were initially lower in many places as a result of work-from-home
policies and school closures \[1–3\]. Conversely, exposure to cleaning and disinfection products
may have increased due to enhanced efforts to clean hands and surfaces to reduce viral spread
\[4–6\], particularly towards the beginning of the pandemic due to concern about fomites, and
before person-to-person airborne exposure was widely recognized as the primary source of
COVID-19 transmission. These changes are dynamic and result in ‘natural experiments’ to
understand how changing exposures influence health outcomes that are sensitive to environmental influence. Prenatal and early life exposure to air pollutants can increase the risk of
adverse health effects including preterm birth, lower birth weight, shortened gestational age,
asthma incidence and exacerbation, and neurodevelopmental outcomes \[7, 8\]. Likewise exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals (e.g., phenols, phthalates, and parabens) found in personal care and cleaning products and processed foods/food packaging have been found to
adversely influence birth outcomes and physical growth \[9\] and may further influence child
respiratory health\[10–14\] and neurodevelopmental outcomes \[15, 16\]. Thus, an unintended
consequence of pandemic-related changes in behavior may influence a wide range of environmental exposures that have implications for aspects of health aside from COVID-19.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has recommended cleaning and

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Changes in behaviors associated with chemical exposures during COVID-19

Measures that include limiting physical interactions, restaurant closures, and reduced hours for grocery stores or food markets during the COVID-19 pandemic in concert with impacts on the food supply chain have likely led to changes in dietary habits during the pan- demic \[19, 20\]. One consumer survey suggests that 72% of individuals are shopping less fre- quently for food. Among families, 70% indicate that they are snacking more frequently, and 88% reported an increased number of meals prepared at home \[21\]. Increased consumption of canned goods or processed food may lead to greater exposure to a variety of endocrine-dis- rupting chemicals including bisphenol A (BPA, and its substitutes), phthalates, and perfluor- oalkyl substances \[22–26\]. Conversely, eating less fast food meals may reduce exposure to some of these same chemicals found in food and food packaging \[27, 28\]. Therefore, in some cases, pandemic-related behavior changes may increase chemical exposures and in other cases, may reduce exposure. Women of reproductive age are among the most common consumers of personal care products and cosmetics \[29\]. Stark differences exist in the types and quantities of products used across racial/ethnic groups; African Americans purchase nine times more beauty prod- ucts than Non-Hispanic Whites, and Latinas are the fastest growing demographic in ethnic beauty product market \[29\]. Chemicals found in these products include phthalates (e.g., diethyl phthalate (DEP), di-n-butyl phthalate (DnBP) and di-isobutyl phthalate (DiBP)), para- bens and other environmental phenols that have endocrine disrupting properties \[10, 30\]. Importantly, public health agencies, including the CDC, acknowledge that the COVID-19 pandemic can increase stress. A recent review of the literature documented a 16–28% increase in anxiety and depression and an 8% increase in self-reported stress associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, and that individual and structural factors may moderate risk of these symptoms \[31\]. In addition to depression and anxiety, school closures have led to mental dis- tress among children, with indication that people from marginalized communities may have a worse experience \[32\]. Finally, prior studies document higher rates of psychological distress and posttraumatic stress symptoms after a quarantine due to exposure to an infectious disease \[33\]. The Environmental influences on Child Health Outcomes (ECHO)-wide Cohort is well- positioned to address the interaction between environmental and psychosocial stressors \[34\]. This consortium-based cohort has representation from 69 U.S. based cohort studies who began using a common data collection protocol in 2019. As of March 4, 2022, the consortium includes 29,622 children who have been consented to new data collection under the common protocol. These children were born in 672 counties from 49 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico; however, it is not a probability-based sample that can be generalized to the

U.S. population. We hypothesized that COVID-19 would result in changes in environmental chemical expo- sures and pandemic-related traumatic stress. Here, our objective was to understand how behaviors related to environmental exposures have changed in conjunction with the COVID- 19 pandemic and whether pandemic-related traumatic stress is associated with pandemic- related behavior change. Future biomarker analyses can determine whether behavior changes observed here associated with chemical exposure levels. **Methods** The ECHO-wide Cohort Study is an NIH-funded research collaborative \[35\], in which 69 ongoing cohorts contributed extant data and enrolled participants for continued data collec- tion according to an IRB-approved ECHO-wide Cohort Protocol (EWCP). Participants were initially enrolled at various life stages from pre-conception through early childhood, with the
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679) January 13, 2023 3 / 18

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Changes in behaviors associated with chemical exposures during COVID-19

majority recruited during pregnancy or at birth. Cohorts were asked to administer a new sur- vey to elicit information on environmental exposures and subsequent behaviors during the COVID-19 pandemic from pregnant women or caregivers of children enrolled in the study. The data were managed, harmonized and analyzed by the ECHO Data Analysis Center in a Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) moderate platform \[35\].

## Changes in Environmental Exposures (CEE) component of covid-19 survey

A brief series of questions capturing data on COVID-19 Changes in the Environmental Expo- sures (CEE) (see S1 File) was developed to focus on behaviors that have been previously associ- ated with exposure to environmental chemicals, including diet, food preparation, personal care product and consumer product use. The survey was programmed in REDCAP Central, a centralized web-based data entry system, to be administered along with the follow-up COVID-19 questionnaire, which elicited information about COVID-related acute stress (see below). Both the CEE survey and COVID-19 questionnaires were available in both English and Spanish, and could be either interviewer-or self-administered. Administration began after the ECHO-wide Cohort Central IRB approval in December 2020 and local IRB approval (as necessary) was obtained (December 2020 to April 2021). Nine ECHO cohorts located in New Hampshire, Rhode Island, New York, Illinois, California, and Washington elected to adminis- ter this survey. A total of 1535 participants completed the survey from December 2020 through May 2021. Although data collection is still ongoing, more than 67% of the data reported here were contributed by participants in the rural state of New Hampshire by the New Hampshire Birth Cohort Study. This differential response was due to variation in the underlying cohort sample sizes and protocol procedures, including IRB approval, that enabled faster/slower roll- out of survey administration by cohort.

## Pandemic-related Traumatic Stress (PTS) symptoms measured in the

## COVID-19 survey

Ten items were administered to measure PTS symptoms \[36\] based on acute stress disorder symptoms measured in the DSM-5 \[37\], which evaluate symptomology and severity within the month following a traumatic event. Although living during a pandemic may not be tradition- ally viewed as an inciting event in the DSM-5 (e.g., post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)) \[37\], the COVID-19 pandemic did present as a life-threatening experience–both real and per- ceived–to many individuals. COVID-19 has been described as eliciting traumatic stress reac- tions above and beyond distress related to disruptions to daily life \[38, 39\]. It has infected nearly 80 million people in the US, taken the lives of around 1 million Americans and has been responsible for an estimated 900,000 hospitalizations, of which 20% required ICU interven- tion, and causing long-term physical, mental, and cognitive consequences in one in three sur- vivors \[40, 41\]. The fear and experiences of contracting the virus, witnessing or putting a loved one at risk, and suffering severe illness or death all reflect the life-threatening nature of the pandemic that can result in traumatic stress reactions \[41, 42\]. The survey was administered concurrently with the CEE survey, well after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic (provided in S1 File). We thus further conjecture that given the protracted nature of the COVID-19 pan- demic, this scale captures a relevant measure of pandemic-related traumatic stress rather than acute stress per se. Regardless of timing, the scale captures an individual’s experience of acute stress symptoms in the context of the pandemic. Given time limitations and concerns about participant burden, 10 items were developed to query these 5 areas: intrusion (e.g., distressing dreams, been distressed when seeing something that is reminiscent of COVID-19); negative mood (e.g., anhedonia or the inability to feel

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679) January 13, 2023 4 / 18

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Changes in behaviors associated with chemical exposures during COVID-19

pleasure, anger disproportionate to the situation); disassociation (e.g., feelings of time slowing); _avoidance (e.g., purposeful efforts to avoid thinking about the event or actions that are not_ congruent with required realities of persisting threats); and difficulty regulating arousal (e.g., sleep disturbance, irritability, poor concentration). Questions began “Since becoming aware of the COVID-19 outbreak, how often have you \[experienced the following\]”. Each item was assessed using a Likert scale: not at all (1), rarely (2), sometimes (3), often (4), very often (5). An endorsement of 3 (sometimes), 4 (often), or 5 (very often) is considered significant. The Total number of symptoms was calculated as a sum of those symptoms (items) endorsed at a significant level (endorse at level 3, 4, or 5) \[36\].

## Statistical approach

We report descriptive statistics of cross-sectionally obtained survey data on the reported changes in environmental exposures and behaviors from pre-COVID to the COVID era. Data from the CEE form were merged with other ECHO-Wide Cohort Protocol (EWCP) demo- graphic and geographic data to examine whether these factors along with COVID-related stressors are associated with pandemic-related behavior change. Because the pandemic created dynamic circumstances that may influence behaviors under investigation, we compared those who responded early in the survey administration period (e.g., December 2020 through Febru- ary 2021) and those who responded later in the survey administration period (e.g., March 2021 through May 2021); this cut-point distinguishes those who responded during the first year of the pandemic vs. afterwards. This survey was formatted so that for each question, respondents had the option to indicate whether their behaviors increased, decreased or did not change. Because we focused our analy- sis on outcomes that varied (either increased or decreased), behaviors were coded as binary, based on how the data were collected (e.g., more or less than before the pandemic). These out- comes include: eating more home cooked meals, eating less fast food, drinking more alcoholic beverages, drinking less alcoholic beverages, using more antimicrobial soaps, using more bleach products, and using more hand sanitizer. Anyone who reported using more items of interest was defined as yes (= 1) for the ‘more’ outcome variables, the remaining participants (those who reported the same or less) were defined as no (= 0) for the same outcome behavior. Similarly, the less outcome was defined as doing the behavior less than before the pandemic vs. all others (i.e., same and more). Composites were created for outcome variables where the outcome was characterized by multiple individual components. We calculated whether participants use fewer hair products if reported less use of at least 2 products (perms, hair dye, hair spray, hair gel), and use less make-up/body products if reported less use of at least 2 products (nail polish, make-up, per- fume). The ultra-processed foods include 10 food categories based on the NOVA classification system, a validated method by which all foods are grouped based on the industrial processes they undergo \[43\]: sweetened milk substitute, sweetened yogurt or ice cream, sweetened bever- ages, commercially made desserts, frozen meats, meatless patties, commercially-made breads, dry cake mixes, packaged snacks, and sweetened breakfast cereals. For each participant, the total number of more food items that were eaten (sum score ranged 0–10) and less food items eaten (sum score ranged 0–10) were created first, and then the top 10% of the sum scores of the ultra-processed food, (e.g., > = 3 of eating more ultra-processed food, and > = 3 of eating less ultra-processed food), were used as cutoffs to define these binary outcomes. Chi-square tests were used to examine whether a specific outcome varied by geographic location, demographic characteristics, or stress from the COVID-19 pandemic. Separate logis- tic regression models were run for each outcome to examine the association between possible

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679) January 13, 2023 5 / 18

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Changes in behaviors associated with chemical exposures during COVID-19

factors and behavioral change outcomes due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We used two multi- variable logistic models, where model 1 included age, race/ethnicity (Hispanic, non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic Asian, and non-Hispanic Other), education, employment, marital status, number of people in the household, whether any household mem- ber tested COVID-19 positive, and whether the cohort was New Hampshire (NH) vs. non- NH. In addition to these characteristics, model 2 included the number of stress symptoms (none (0), minimal (1–3), moderate (4–6), and severe (7–9) stress symptoms) as a predictor of the behaviors. We also examined whether there was a monotonic trend of the number of pan- demic-related traumatic stress symptoms associated with each outcome after adjusting for all variables in model 1. Missing data were addressed in the analyses with multiple imputation (MI) by fully condi- tional specification with a discriminant function \[44\]. Imputation was performed for: respon- dents’ age (percentage missing was 6.3%), race/ethnicity (4.6%), maternal education (16.0%), employment (4.4%), marital status (27.4%), number of people living in the household (0.8%), whether there was a COVID-19 positive member of the household (3.5%), total number of stress symptoms (7.6%), and all outcome variables, i.e., eat more home cooked meals (0.8%), less fast food (1.0%), less alcoholic beverages (2.8%), more for > = 3 processed foods (6.7%), less for > = 5 processed food (6.7%), less hair products (5.0%), less make-up/body products (2.9%), more antimicrobial soaps (0.5%), more hand sanitizer (0.5%), more antibacterial household cleansers (1.3%), and more bleach products (1.4%). Imputation models included all variables listed above and cohort group membership (NH vs non-NH).

**Results**

## Study participants and pandemic context

A total of 1535 individuals responded to the survey; 11 participants responded more than once however only their first response was included here. They had children participating in the ECHO-wide cohort between the ages of 0–17.9 years (median 5.9, IQR 2.26–8.49). The median age of survey respondents was 37 years. In addition, 117 (8%) of respondents were pregnant when they completed the survey. Among respondents, 77% completed the survey from December 2020 through February 2021, and 23% responded from March 2021 through May 2021 (Table 1). Generally, respondents were similar across these two periods, except with respect to ethnicity. Those who participated in the earlier window were more likely (87%) to self-identify as Non-Hispanic White (vs. 45% in the later window) while 32% of respondents who reported in the later window self-identified as Hispanic (vs. 6% in the earlier window). This is mainly due to differential cohort protocols with respect to survey administration, such that approximately two-thirds of respondents included in this analysis were from the New Hampshire area. Subsequent analyses did not distinguish between the response periods; how- ever, we considered these ethnic differences within the response periods and covaried for cohort group membership in the interpretation of results. Because the survey administration spanned December 2020 through May 2021, we inquired about local governmental advice, personal and household COVID-19 infection positivity, and stress symptoms associated with the pandemic at the time of survey completion. At the time of survey completion, 43% of all respondents indicated that their local government was encour- aging them to stay at home and 41% recommended social distancing when going out; 12% were ordered by their local government to stay at home. Of all respondents, 10% indicated that they or a member of their household had tested positive for COVID-19 prior to survey com- pletion. Among survey respondents, 13%, 38%, 36%, and 14% reported experiencing no,

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679) January 13, 2023 6 / 18

* * *

Table 1. Characteristics of respondents to the CEE survey December 2020-May 2021.

| Characteristics, N(%) with data | December 2020—February 2021 | March—May 2021 | Overall |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| \# of participants | 1177 | 358 | 1535 |
| Age of respondent (years) | 1145(97%) | 293(82%) | 1438 (94%) |
| 19–24 years | 13(1%) | 26(9%) | 39(3%) |
| 25–34 years | 377(33%) | 107(37%) | 484(34%) |
| 35–44 years | 659(58%) | 134(46%) | 793(55%) |
| 45+ years | 96(8%) | 26(9%) | 122(8%) |
| Race/Ethnicity, | 1127(96%) | 337(94%) | 1464 (95%) |
| Hispanic | 71(6%) | 108(32%) | 179(12%) |
| non-Hispanic-White | 983(87%) | 150(45%) | 1133 (77%) |
| non-Hispanic-Black | 12(1%) | 23(7%) | 35(2%) |
| non-Hispanic-Asian | 5(<1%) | 20(6%) | 25(2%) |
| non-Hispanic-Other | 56(5%) | 36(11%) | 92(6%) |
| Maternal educationa}$ | $948(80%) | 341(95%) | 1289 (84%) |
| < High School | 18(2%) | 28(8%) | 46(4%) |
| High School | 89(9%) | 45(13%) | 134(10%) |
| Some college and above | 841(89%) | 268(79%) | 1109 (86%) |
| Employment | 1161(99%) | 306(86%) | 1467 (96%) |
| Employed | 922(79%) | 228(75%) | 1150 (78%) |
| Unemployed | 239(21%) | 78(25%) | 317(22%) |
| Marital Status^{b}$ | $785(67%) | 329(92%) | 1114 (73%) |
| Married/living with a partner | 680(87%) | 252(77%) | 932(84%) |
| Single | 105(13%) | 77(23%) | 182(16%) |
| \# of people in household | 1171(99.5%) | 351(98%) | 1522 (99%) |
| 1–3 people | 313(27%) | 117(33%) | 430(28%) |
| 4–6 people | 788(67%) | 213(61%) | 1001 (66%) |
| 7+ people | 70(6%) | 21(6%) | 91(6%) |
| Current Circumstancesc}$ | $1171(99.5%) | 351(98%) | 1522 (99%) |
| Local government ordered to stay at home | 134(11%) | 47(13%) | 181(12%) |
| Local government encouraged to stay at home | 544(46%) | 105(30%) | 649(43%) |
| Local government recommended social distancing | 454(39%) | 172(49%) | 626(41%) |
| No local government recommendation | 39(3%) | 27(8%) | 66(4%) |
| Household member Household COVID-19 status | 1169(99%) | 312(87%) | 1481 (96%) |
| Any positive (including respondent) | 85(7%) | 64(21%) | 149(10%) |
| All negative | 1084(93%) | 248(79%) | 1332 (90%) |
| Total # of acute stress symptomsd}$ | $1128(96%) | 291(81%) | 1419 (92%) |
| 0 symptoms | 135(12%) | 47(16%) | 182(13%) |

* * *

Table 1. (Continued)

| Characteristics,N(%) with data | December 2020—February 2021 | March一May2021 | Overall |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1-3 symptoms | 412(37%) | 122(42%) | 534(38%) |
| 4-6 symptoms | 417(37%) | 94(32%) | 511(36%) |
| 7-9 symptoms | 164(15%) | 28(10%) | 192(14%) |
| Cohorts,Location |  |  |  |
| Brown university Assessment of Myelination and Behavior Across normal Maturation(BAMBAM),Rhode Island | 35(3%) | 76(21%) | 111(7%) |
| Maternal health Influences and Nutrition in Neonatal and Infant dEvelopment(MINNIE),Rhode Island | 28(2%) | 52(15%) | 80(5%) |
| New Hampshire Birth Cohort Study(NHBCS),New Hampshire | 1030(88%) | 0(0%) | 1030(67%) |
| The Global Alliance to Prevent Prematurity and Stillbirth(GAPPS),Washington | <5(<1%) | <55(<16%) | 57(4%) |
| Columbia Center for Children's Environmental Health(CCCEH)Sibling/Hermanos,New York | <10(<1%) | <25(<7%) | 33(2%) |
| CCCEH Fair Start Study,New York | 36(3%) | 48(13%) | 84(5%) |
| Illinois Kids Development Study(IKIDS),Illinois | 0(0%) | 32(9%) | 32(2%) |
| Chemicals in our Bodies(CIOB),California | 24(2%) | 58(16%) | 82(5%) |
| aMaternal education data representing the highest level of educational attainment was harmonized into three categories:less than high school,高学校,或some college and above。bMarital status was also dichotomized as married/living with a partner or not married(widowed;separated;divorced;single,never married;partnered(boyfriend or girlfriend,not living together)。cCurrent Circumstances was harmonized into four mutually exclusive categories:Local government ordered residents to stay at home;encouraged residents to stay at home;made social distancing recommendations,但 did not encourage or order residents to stay at home;and Local government did not make stay at home or social distancing recommendations.If a respondent answered“yes”to multiple situations,the respondent was put into the most restricted group。dFor the 9 stress questions asked in the COVID-19 questionnaire,the total number of questions with score>=3was considered as the number of symptoms at a significant level(35)，and was then grouped as0,1-3,4-6,或7-9(categorical mid-points were used in multivariate analyses when examining linear trend)。 |  |  |  |

a
Maternal education data representing the highest level of educational attainment was harmonized into three categories: less than high school, high school, or some
college and above.
b
Marital status was also dichotomized as married/living with a partner or not married (widowed; separated; divorced; single, never married; partnered (boyfriend or

b
Marital status was also dichotomized as married/living with a partner or not married (widowed; separated; divorced; single, never married; partnered (boyfriend or
girlfriend, not living together).
c
Current Circumstances was harmonized into four mutually exclusive categories: Local government ordered residents to stay at home; encouraged residents to stay at

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679.t001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679.t001)

minimal, moderate, and severe pandemic-related traumatic stress symptoms associated with
the pandemic.

We observed that nearly half (49%) of all respondents reported eating more home cooked
meals because of the pandemic; only 3% reported eating fewer home cooked meals (Fig 1).
The proportion eating more home cooked meals was highest among Hispanics compared to
other racial/ethnic groups (64% vs. 46%-58%), and among those who tested positive or who
lived in a household where someone tested positive for COVID-19 (59% vs. 48%). We also
observed that respondents who reported more symptoms of pandemic-related traumatic stress
reported eating more home cooked meals (p-trend < 0.001) (Fig 2). In multivariable models,
Hispanic ethnicity, older age, having fewer people in the household, and reporting more pandemic-related traumatic stress symptoms were all independently associated with the consumption of more home cooked meals (Table 2).
One-third (34%) of our respondents reported eating less fast food. Ethnicity was differentially associated with consuming less fast food. A reduction in fast food consumption was most

Food-related behaviors

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Changes in behaviors associated with chemical exposures during COVID-19

**Fig 1. Exposures reported to be significantly less or more frequent than before the COVID-19 pandemic.**

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679.g001)

## Consumption of ultra-processed food

Based on our definition of ultra-processed foods, 12% reported eating more ultra-processed foods and 24% reported eating less processed foods since the start of the pandemic (Fig 1). Being single (19% vs. 11% among partnered, p = 0.01), unemployed (21% vs. 10% among employed, p<0.001) and testing positive or living in a household where someone tested posi- tive for COVID-19 (21% vs. 12% living in a household where all members remained COVID negative, p = 0.001) was associated with more processed food consumption. Ethnicity and race were also associated (p = 0.022) with eating more processed food—Asian (24%), Hispanic (19%), Black (16%) and White (11%) participants. As the number of pandemic-related trau- matic stress symptoms increased, the probability of consuming more processed food con- sumption also increased monotonically (p-trend < 0.001). In multivariable models, unemployment, being single and more pandemic-related traumatic stress symptoms were associated with consumption of more processed foods (Table 2). Older participants were more likely to report eating more processed food, whereas younger participants reported eating less processed food than older respondents (p = 0.01). Being single (33% vs. 22% among partnered, p = 0.002), or Hispanic ethnicity ((55%) vs. non-Hispanic Black (38%), non-Hispanic Asian (24%) and non-Hispanic White (19%), p<0.001) was associ- ated with less processed food consumption. Respondents with less than a high school educa- tion reported eating less processed food (57% vs. 39% who completed high school vs. 21% among those who completed at least some college, p<0.001). Those living in households where at least one member tested positive for COVID-19 also reported eating less processed foods (37% vs. 23%, p<0.001). Reporting the highest number of pandemic-related traumatic

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679) January 13, 2023 9 / 18

* * *

Use of personal care products

Fig 2. Adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for differences in exposure during vs. before the
COVID-19 pandemic by acute stress symptom scores.Adjusted for age, race/ethnicity, education, employment,
marital status, number of people in the household, whether any household member tested COVID-19 positive, and
whether the cohort was New Hampshire (NH). Statistically significant results indicated by red marker.

stress symptoms (7–9) were associated with consuming less processed foods (p<0.001). In
multivariable models, self-reported Hispanic ethnicity (relative to non-Hispanic White ethnicity), less maternal education, and reporting a high number of pandemic-related traumatic
stress symptoms were associated with eating fewer processed foods.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679.g002)

* * *

Table 2. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals from multivariate models for key exposures and behaviors of interest .

|  | Less than before COVID-19 |  |  |  | More than before COVID-19 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| fast food | processed food | hair products | cosmetic products | home cooked meals | processed foods | antibacterial soaps | hand sanitizers | antibacterial cleaners | bleach cleaners |  |  |  |
| Age of respondent (ref: 19–24 years) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 25–34 years | 2.5 | 1.2 | 1.4 | 1.5 | 2.0 | 0.9 | 1.5 | 1.1 | 1.9 | 1.8 |  |  |
| (1.1, 5.8) | (0.6, 2.6) | (0.7, 2.9) | (0.7, 3.1) | (0.9, 4.1) | (0.3, 2.4) | (0.7, 3.1) | (0.5, 2.3) | (0.9, 3.9) | (0.9, 3.7) |  |  |  |
| 35–44 years | 2.4 | 0.9 | 0.8 | 1.1 | 2.1 | 1.0 | 1.7 | 2.0 | 2.5 | 2.1 |  |  |
| (1.0, 5.5) | (0.4, 2.0) | (0.4, 1.7) | (0.5, 2.2) | (1.0, 4.3) | (0.4, 2.5) | (0.8, 3.5) | (0.9, 4.2) | (1.2, 5.3) | (1.0, 4.4) |  |  |  |
| 45+ years | 3.0 | 1.1 | 0.8 | 0.9 | 2.7 | 1.1 | 1.5 | 2.1 | 2.5 | 2.1 |  |  |
| (1.2, 7.4) | (0.5, 2.7) | (0.4, 1.9) | (0.4, 2.1) | (1.2, 6.2) | (0.4, 3.2) | (0.6, 3.3) | (0.8, 5.1) | (1.1, 5.8) | (0.9, 4.7) |  |  |  |
| Race/Ethnicity (ref: non-Hispanic White) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Hispanic | 2.3 | 3.5 | 4.2 | 1.6 | 2.4 | 1.2 | 2.1 | 1.1 | 2.6 | 3.3 |  |  |
| (1.4, 3.5) | (2.2, 5.6) | (2.6, 6.6) | (1.0, 2.4) | (1.5, 3.9) | (0.7, 2.3) | (1.3, 3.2) | (0.6, 1.9) | (1.6, 4.2) | (2.1, 5.3) |  |  |  |
| non-Hispanic-Black | 0.9 | 2.2 | 2.8 | 1.5 | 1.8 | 1.6 | 1.6 | 1.2 | 1.9 | 2.3 |  |  |
| (0.4, 2.0) | (1.0, 5.0) | (1.3, 6.0) | (0.7, 3.3) | (0.8, 3.9) | (0.6, 4.5) | (0.7, 3.4) | (0.5, 2.9) | (0.8, 4.5) | (1.0, 5.1) |  |  |  |
| non-Hispanic-Asian | 1.3 | 1.4 | 1.2 | 1.3 | 1.0 | 2.5 | 1.3 | 0.9 | 0.9 | 0.9 |  |  |
| (0.6, 3.0) | (0.5, 3.6) | (0.5, 3.1) | (0.6, 2.8) | (0.4, 2.2) | (0.9, 6.8) | (0.6, 2.9) | (0.3, 2.5) | (0.4, 2.1) | (0.4, 2.1) |  |  |  |
| non-Hispanic-Other | 1.0 | 1.0 | 1.5 | 1.2 | 1.6 | 1.0 | 0.8 | 1.3 | 1.1 | 1.0 |  |  |
| (0.6, 1.6) | (0.6, 1.8) | (0.9, 2.4) | (0.8, 1.9) | (1.0, 2.5) | (0.5, 2.0) | (0.5, 1.2) | (0.7, 2.4) | (0.7, 1.8) | (0.7, 1.6) |  |  |  |
| Maternal education (ref: some college and above) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| < High School | 1.4 | 2.5 | 1.8 | 2.0 | 0.7 | 0.8 | 0.8 | 0.8 | 0.7 | 0.5 |  |  |

(Continued)

* * *

Table 2. (Continued)

|  | Less than before COVID-19 |  |  |  | More than before COVID-19 |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| fast food | processed food | hair products | cosmetic products | home cooked meals | processed foods | antibacterial soaps | hand sanitizers | antibacterial cleaners | bleach cleaners |  |
| any positive (incl. respondent) | 1.1 | 1.2 | 1.1 | 1.2 | 1.4 | 1.6 | 0.8 | 0.7 | 1.1 | 1.2 |
| (0.7,1.6) | (0.8,1.9) | (0.8,1.7) | (0.9,1.8) | (1.0,2.0) | (1.0,2.6) | (0.5,1.1) | (0.5,1.1) | (0.7,1.6) | (0.8,1.7) |  |
| Cohort group(ref: non-NH cohort) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| NH cohort | 1.0 | 0.9 | 0.9 | 0.9 | 1.0 | 0.9 | 1.1 | 1.4 | 1.3 | 1.4 |
| (0.8,1.4) | (0.6,1.2) | (0.6,1.2) | (0.6,1.1) | (0.7,1.3) | (0.6,1.4) | (0.8,1.5) | (1.1,2.0) | (1.0,1.7) | (1.1,1.9) |  |
| Total Number of stress symptoms(ref:0 symptoms) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 1-3 symptoms | 1.6 | 1.3 | 1.4 | 1.9 | 2.2 | 1.9 | 1.7 | 2.2 | 1.4 | 1.3 |
| (1.1,2.3) | (0.9,2.1) | (1.0,2.2) | (1.3,2.8) | (1.5,3.2) | (0.9,4.1) | (1.2,2.5) | (1.5,3.3) | (1.0,2.0) | (0.9,1.8) |  |
| 4-6 symptoms | 1.5 | 1.1 | 1.3 | 2.1 | 2.8 | 4.6 | 2.2 | 3.4 | 1.9 | 1.7 |
| (1.0,2.2) | (0.7,1.8) | (0.9,2.0) | (1.4,3.2) | (1.9,4.1) | (2.2,9.5) | (1.5,3.2) | (2.3,5.1) | (1.3,2.8) | (1.2,2.4) |  |
| 7-9 symptoms | 2.5 | 2.0 | 2.8 | 3.9 | 3.9 | 5.3 | 2.9 | 4.8 | 2.2 | 1.9 |
| (1.6,3.9) | (1.2,3.4) | (1.7,4.4) | (2.4,6.1) | (2.5,6.0) | (2.4,11.6) | (1.9,4.4) | (2.8,8.4) | (1.4,3.5) | (1.2,2.9) |  |

statistically significant results (p<0.05) presented in bold font
respondents had the option to report whether they used more/less/same amount as before the pandemic; here we report behaviors where a significant number

respondents had the option to report whether they used more/less/same amount as before the pandemic; here we report behaviors where a significant number
reported changing their behavior in either direction.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679.t002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679.t002)

body products (including nail polish, make-up, perfume, and lotion) (Fig 1). Generally, participants who reported using fewer hair products were more likely to be younger (p < 0.001),
more likely to be Hispanic (71%), have completed less education (73% less than high school,
50% high school, 30% some college), unemployed (44% vs. 31% employed), single (52% vs.
30% partnered), and lower income (p < 0.001). Households in which a respondent tested positive for COVID-19 were more likely to use fewer hair products (49% vs. 33% for households
without a positive test) and participants who experienced more pandemic-related traumatic
stress symptoms were more likely to report using fewer hair products (p < 0.001). The trends
were similar for reduced cosmetic use. In multivariable models, Hispanic ethnicity, Non-Hispanic Black race and more pandemic-related traumatic stress symptoms were independently
associated with using fewer hair products and fewer make-up products (Table 2).
Approximately half of all respondents reported using more liquid soaps (52%) and antibac-

body products (including nail polish, make-up, perfume, and lotion) (Fig 1). Generally, participants who reported using fewer hair products were more likely to be younger (p < 0.001),
more likely to be Hispanic (71%), have completed less education (73% less than high school,
50% high school, 30% some college), unemployed (44% vs. 31% employed), single (52% vs.
30% partnered), and lower income (p < 0.001). Households in which a respondent tested positive for COVID-19 were more likely to use fewer hair products (49% vs. 33% for households
without a positive test) and participants who experienced more pandemic-related traumatic
stress symptoms were more likely to report using fewer hair products (p < 0.001). The trends
were similar for reduced cosmetic use. In multivariable models, Hispanic ethnicity, Non-Hispanic Black race and more pandemic-related traumatic stress symptoms were independently
associated with using fewer hair products and fewer make-up products (Table 2).
Approximately half of all respondents reported using more liquid soaps (52%) and antibac-

({\\mathfrak{p}}!<!0.001)

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Changes in behaviors associated with chemical exposures during COVID-19

## Use of consumer products

Two-thirds of respondents reported using more antibacterial cleaners and 54% reported using more bleach-containing cleaning products since the start of the pandemic. Older respondents were more likely to use more antimicrobial cleaning products (p < 0.01) and bleach-contain- ing products (p = 0.02) and those who self-identify as Hispanic were more likely to use bleach- containing products and antibacterial cleaners relative to other race/ethnic groups (p < 0.001 and p = 0.04, respectively). Those who were employed (56% vs. 47%) and those who were sin- gle (60% vs. 51%) reported using more bleach containing products. Participants who reported experiencing more pandemic-related traumatic stress were also more likely to use more anti- microbial and bleach-containing products (p < 0.001). In multivariable models, Hispanic eth- nicity and pandemic-related stress predicted more use of antimicrobial and bleach-containing cleansers. For antimicrobial cleaners, increasing age was an independently significant predic- tor and for bleach-containing cleaners, Non-Hispanic Blacks and those from the NH-based cohort also reported increased use (Table 2).

**Discussion**

## Key findings

We identified some changes in behaviors that are associated with chemical exposures during the COVID-19 pandemic in expected directions. For example, since the start of the pandemic, we found that overall, respondents reported using fewer personal care products like hair dyes and make-up but more sanitizing and cleaning products. While we did not measure actual exposure change here, based on the existing literature, we may expect that these behavior changes reflect changes in environmental chemical exposures. We can infer that some behaviors might lead to less chemical exposure (e.g., less consumption of fast foods and less use of personal care products may be associated with lower exposure to some phthalates and phenols) \[27, 45\] or more chemical exposure (e.g., more use of personal and household cleansers may be associated with higher exposure to quaternary ammonium compounds and glycol ethers) \[46\]. Ultra-processed food consumption has been associated with increased exposure to chemical classes including phthalates and phenols \[47\]. Multivariable analyses indicated that there were notable demographic and geographic trends associated with increased or decreased behaviors potentially associated with chemical exposures. For example, respondents who self-identified as being of Hispanic ethnicity reported many behavior changes, and increasing age was associated with less fast food, but more antibacterial cleanser use. Despite small sample sizes in some strata, this information may be used to anticipate subpopulations who are more likely to be exposed to a variety of chemicals associated with these behavior changes. These results can be further explored and potentially validated with biomarker studies to determine whether behavior changes observed here associate with chemical exposure levels. Therefore, we may be able to anticipate subpopu- lations who may be at higher risk for health outcomes associated with these exposures. Overall, we found that symptoms of pandemic-related traumatic stress were consistently associated with the pandemic-related behavior changes, indicating that those who experienced the most significant shifts in behavior (and likely environmental exposures) also reported more pandemic-related traumatic stress symptoms. However, we cannot discern from our study whether stress leads to behavior change, whether behavior change leads to stress or whether they occur concurrently. There is a growing literature indicating that chemical and psychosocial stressors interact, exacerbating health outcomes associated with either one inde- pendently44. Therefore, the findings reported here highlight the importance of considering

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679) January 13, 2023 13 / 18

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Changes in behaviors associated with chemical exposures during COVID-19

pandemic-related stress when examining the impact of exposures on health outcomes (and vice versa). We also note that because both metrics were reported by the same individual, it is possible that single reporter bias may have influenced the likelihood of these associations. Finally, while our survey questions specifically focused on symptoms and experiences since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is not possible to rule out the possibility that other circum- stances outside of the pandemic itself influenced the experience and reporting of these symptoms. From our initial survey, it is not clear whether behavior changes will be sustained as the COVID-19 pandemic evolves. The administration of our questionnaire spanned December 2020 to May 2021 and continues to be administered to many of the cohorts across the consor- tium. It will be important to continue to monitor pandemic related behavior change as the pandemic evolves and waves of pandemic severity wax and wane.

**Strengths**

To our knowledge, this study is the first of its kind to evaluate how the COVID-19 pandemic may have influenced behaviors associated with chemical exposures and the first to look at how these behaviors change with pandemic-related stress. Because this investigation was conducted within the ECHO-wide cohort, we were able to take advantage of a relatively large sample size of women that was somewhat diverse in terms of geography, race, and ethnicity, and socioeco- nomic status allowing us to detect patterns in behaviors and to make inferences based on pre- vious literature about pandemic-related effects of these behaviors on environmental exposures within subgroups (specific population strata).

**Limitations**

The CEE survey enabled us to capture dynamic behaviors that may lead to shifts in environ- mental exposure during critical time windows. We acknowledge that in some cases, self- reported behaviors may not correlate with associated environmental exposures, there are some environmental chemicals that cannot be well assessed via questionnaire, and retrospective sur- vey responses may be subject to differential recall. Further, our goal was to create a relatively short questionnaire that could be added without increasing participant burden. We, therefore, did not assess baseline behaviors but rather captured behavior change. There are some limita- tions with respect to the population to whom our survey was administered. Many of our respondents were from one NH-based cohort in a rural setting. The way that the questionnaire was rolled out for administration in the participating cohorts, including the timing of IRB approval and whether the cohorts could “blast” the questionnaires to all participants at once or whether they administer them one-by-one, also contributed to the variation in response across the cohorts. In addition, our ECHO sample did not include enough pregnant women to exam- ine this subgroup separately and changes in behaviors (and related exposures) during preg- nancy are important to understand as they have direct implications on many developmental processes. However, pregnant women may change their behavior due to pregnancy rather than due solely to the pandemic; therefore, a larger sample size would be needed to understand these shifts. Finally, cohorts offered this survey according to their local cohort protocols. Therefore, not every member of every cohort included was offered a survey during the study period, precluding our ability to calculate a survey response rate.

**Conclusions**

Among a subset of participants from a national cohort study, we characterized changes in behaviors related to environmental chemical exposures during the COVID-19 pandemic. As

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679) January 13, 2023 14 / 18 part of the ECHO consortium, by repeating this analysis using a panel of urinary biomarkers
reflecting chemical exposure, we can confirm whether the trends in pandemic-related behavior
change reported here do, in fact, result in shifts in biomarkers of internal dose. Changes in certain behaviors differed by sociodemographic factors (e.g., Hispanic ethnicity) and nearly all
pandemic-related changes in behaviors we assessed were related to more reported pandemicrelated traumatic stress symptoms. These findings highlight that behavior change associated
with the pandemic and experiencing pandemic-related traumatic stress often co-occurred.
Thus, interventions and campaigns targeting the reduction of environmental exposures, pandemic-related traumatic stress as well as those that facilitate behavior change may lead to the
largest health benefits in the context of a pandemic. Future biomarker analyses can determine
whether behavior changes observed here associate with chemical exposure levels.

Supporting information

S1 File. ECHO COVID-19 changes in environmental exposures questionnaire (version 2,
April 2021).
(PDF)

(PDF)

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank our ECHO colleagues, the medical, nursing and program staff, as
well as the children and families participating in the ECHO cohorts. We also acknowledge the
contribution of the following ECHO program collaborators: Coordinating Center: Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, North Carolina: Smith PB, Newby KL, Benjamin DK; Data
Analysis Center: Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland: Jacobson LP; Research Triangle Institute, Durham, North Carolina: Parker CB. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official
views of the National Institutes of Health.

Author Contributions

Conceptualization: Megan E. Romano, Xiuhong Li, Lisa P. Jacobson, Amy E. Margolis, Deborah H. Bennett, Jessie P. Buckley, Leonardo Trasande, Tracey J. Woodruff, Frederica P. Perera, Margaret R. Karagas.

Methodology: Julie B. Herbstman, Amy E. Margolis.

Formal analysis: Julie B. Herbstman, Megan E. Romano, Xiuhong Li, Ghassan B. Hamra.

Supervision: Julie B. Herbstman.

Funding acquisition: Julie B. Herbstman, Lisa P. Jacobson, Deborah H. Bennett, Sean Deoni,
Sheela Sathyanarayana, Susan L. Schantz, Leonardo Trasande, Tracey J. Woodruff, Frederica P. Perera, Margaret R. Karagas.

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Changes in behaviors associated with chemical exposures during COVID-19

## Writing – original draft: Julie B. Herbstman, Megan E. Romano, Xiuhong Li, Lisa P. Jacob-

son, Amy E. Margolis, Ghassan B. Hamra, Deborah H. Bennett, Joseph M. Braun, Jessie P. Buckley, Trina Colburn, Sean Deoni, Lori A. Hoepner, Rachel Morello-Frosch, Kylie Wheelock Riley, Sheela Sathyanarayana, Susan L. Schantz, Leonardo Trasande, Tracey J. Woodruff, Frederica P. Perera, Margaret R. Karagas.

## Writing – review & editing: Julie B. Herbstman, Megan E. Romano, Xiuhong Li, Lisa P.

Jacobson, Amy E. Margolis, Ghassan B. Hamra, Deborah H. Bennett, Joseph M. Braun, Jes- sie P. Buckley, Trina Colburn, Sean Deoni, Lori A. Hoepner, Rachel Morello-Frosch, Kylie Wheelock Riley, Sheela Sathyanarayana, Susan L. Schantz, Leonardo Trasande, Tracey J. Woodruff, Frederica P. Perera, Margaret R. Karagas.

**References**

**1.** Brodeur A, Cook N, Wright T. On the effects of COVID-19 safer-at-home policies on social distancing, car crashes and pollution. J Environ Econ Manage 2021; 106:102427. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem).
2021.102427 PMID: 33583969
**2.** Perera F, Berberian A, Cooley D, et al. Potential health benefits of sustained air quality improvements in New York City: A simulation based on air pollution levels during the COVID-19 shutdown. Environ Res 2021; 193:110555. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110555](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110555) PMID: 33285156
**3.** Son JY, Fong KC, Heo S, Kim H, Lim CC, Bell ML. Reductions in mortality resulting from reduced air pollution levels due to COVID-19 mitigation measures. Sci Total Environ 2020; 744:141012. [https://doi](https://doi/). org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141012 PMID: 32693269
**4.** Chang A, Schnall AH, Law R, et al. Cleaning and Disinfectant Chemical Exposures and Temporal Asso- ciations with COVID-19—National Poison Data System, United States, January 1, 2020-March 31,
2020\. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020; 69:496–8. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6916e1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6916e1) PMID: 32324720
**5.** Erburu-Iriarte M, Rodrigo-Armenteros P, Oyarzun-Irazu I, et al. Chronic severe methanol intoxication after repeated mask cleansing due to fear of COVID-19: A new risk of coronaphobia. Eur J Neurol 2021; 28:3448–51. [https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.14779](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.14779) PMID: 33599071
**6.** Gharpure R, Hunter CM, Schnall AH, et al. Knowledge and Practices Regarding Safe Household Clean- ing and Disinfection for COVID-19 Prevention—United States, May 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020; 69:705–9. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6923e2](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6923e2) PMID: 32525852
**7.** Perera F, Ashrafi A, Kinney P, Mills D. Towards a fuller assessment of benefits to children’s health of reducing air pollution and mitigating climate change due to fossil fuel combustion. Environ Res 2019; 172:55–72. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.12.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.12.016) PMID: 30771627
**8.** Shah PS, Balkhair T, Knowledge Synthesis Group on Determinants of Preterm LBWb. Air pollution and birth outcomes: a systematic review. Environ Int 2011; 37:498–516. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint).
2010.10.009 PMID: 21112090
**9.** Pearce JL, Neelon B, Bloom MS, et al. Exploring associations between prenatal exposure to multiple endocrine disruptors and birth weight with exposure continuum mapping. Environ Res 2021; 200:111386. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.111386](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.111386) PMID: 34087191
**10.** Dodson RE, Nishioka M, Standley LJ, Perovich LJ, Brody JG, Rudel RA. Endocrine disruptors and asthma-associated chemicals in consumer products. Environ Health Perspect 2012; 120:935–43. [https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104052](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104052) PMID: 22398195
**11.** Kim KN, Kim JH, Kwon HJ, et al. Bisphenol A exposure and asthma development in school-age chil- dren: a longitudinal study. PLoS One 2014; 9:e111383. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0111383](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0111383) PMID: 25356742
**12.** Kim YM, Kim J, Cheong HK, Jeon BH, Ahn K. Exposure to phthalates aggravates pulmonary function and airway inflammation in asthmatic children. PLoS One 2018; 13:e0208553. [https://doi.org/10.1371/](https://doi.org/10.1371/) journal.pone.0208553 PMID: 30557318
**13.** Manzano-Salgado CB, Granum B, Lopez-Espinosa MJ, et al. Prenatal exposure to perfluoroalkyl sub- stances, immune-related outcomes, and lung function in children from a Spanish birth cohort study. Int J Hyg Environ Health 2019; 222:945–54. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2019.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2019.06.005) PMID: 31262703
**14.** Zeng X, Chen Q, Zhang X, et al. Association between prenatal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances and asthma-related diseases in preschool children. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 2019; 26:29639–48. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-05864-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-05864-x) PMID: 31399834
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277679) January 13, 2023 16 / 18

* * *

15. Barkoski JM, Busgang SA, Bixby M, et al. Prenatal phenol and paraben exposures in relation to child
    neurodevelopment including autism spectrum disorders in the MARBLES study. Environ Res 2019;
    179:108719. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.108719](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.108719) PMID: 31627027

16. Ejaredar M, Nyanza EC, Ten Eycke K, Dewey D. Phthalate exposure and childrens neurodevelopment:
    A systematic review. Environ Res 2015; 142:51–60. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2015.06.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2015.06.014)
    PMID: 26101203

17. Cleaning and disinfecting your home. 2021. (Accessed October 12, 2021, at [https://www.cdc.gov/](https://www.cdc.gov/)
    coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/disinfecting-your-home.html.)

18. Lin Q, Lim JYC, Xue K, et al. Sanitizing agents for virus inactivation and disinfection. View (Beijing)
    2020:e16. [https://doi.org/10.1002/viw2.16](https://doi.org/10.1002/viw2.16) PMID: 34766164

19. Bennett G, Young E, Butler I, Coe S. The Impact of Lockdown During the COVID-19 Outbreak on Dietary Habits in Various Population Groups: A Scoping Review. Front Nutr 2021; 8:626432. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.3389/fnut.2021.626432 PMID: 33748175

20. Rivera-Ferre M, Lopez-i-Gelats F, Ravera F, et al. The two-way relationship between food systems and
    the COVID19 pandemic: causes and consequences. Agricultural Systems 2021; 191:103–34.

21. DeBroff S. How COVID-19 Has Impacted Consumer Food Habits. Food Manufacturing 2020.

22. Carwile JL, Ye X, Zhou X, Calafat AM, Michels KB. Canned soup consumption and urinary bisphenol A:
    a randomized crossover trial. JAMA 2011; 306:2218–20. [https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2011.1721](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2011.1721)
    PMID: 22110104

23. Curtzwiler GW, Silva P, Hall A, Ivey A, Vorst K. Significance of Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) in
    Food Packaging. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2021; 17:7–12. [https://doi.org/10.1002/ieam.4346](https://doi.org/10.1002/ieam.4346)
    PMID: 32965752

24. Philips EM, Jaddoe VWV, Asimakopoulos AG, et al. Bisphenol and phthalate concentrations and its
    determinants among pregnant women in a population-based cohort in the Netherlands, 2004–5. Environ Res 2018; 161:562–72. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.11.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.11.051) PMID: 29245124

25. Rudel RA, Gray JM, Engel CL, et al. Food packaging and bisphenol A and bis(2-ethyhexyl) phthalate
    exposure: findings from a dietary intervention. Environ Health Perspect 2011; 119:914–20. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1289/ehp.1003170 PMID: 21450549

26. Stacy SL, Eliot M, Calafat AM, et al. Patterns, Variability, and Predictors of Urinary Bisphenol A Concentrations during Childhood. Environ Sci Technol 2016; 50:5981–90. [https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est).
    6b00794 PMID: 27152530

27. Schaider LA, Balan SA, Blum A, et al. Fluorinated Compounds in U.S. Fast Food Packaging. Environ
    Sci Technol Lett 2017; 4:105–11. [https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.6b00435](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.6b00435) PMID: 30148183

28. Zota AR, Phillips CA, Mitro SD. Recent Fast Food Consumption and Bisphenol A and Phthalates Exposures among the U.S. Population in NHANES, 2003–2010. Environ Health Perspect 2016; 124:1521–8.
    [https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1510803](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1510803) PMID: 27072648

29. Zota AR, Shamasunder B. The environmental injustice of beauty: framing chemical exposures from
    beauty products as a health disparities concern. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017; 217:418 e1- e6.

30. Witorsch RJ, Thomas JA. Personal care products and endocrine disruption: A critical review of the literature. Crit Rev Toxicol 2010; 40 Suppl 3:1–30. [https://doi.org/10.3109/10408444.2010.515563](https://doi.org/10.3109/10408444.2010.515563) PMID:
    20932229

31. Rajkumar RP. COVID-19 and mental health: A review of the existing literature. Asian J Psychiatr 2020;
    52:102066. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2020.102066](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2020.102066) PMID: 32302935

32. Dubey S, Biswas P, Ghosh R, et al. Psychosocial impact of COVID-19. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2020;
    14:779–88. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsx.2020.05.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsx.2020.05.035) PMID: 32526627

33. Brooks SK, Webster RK, Smith LE, et al. The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it:
    rapid review of the evidence. Lancet 2020; 395:912–20. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-)
    8 PMID: 32112714

34. Vesterinen HM, Morello-Frosch R, Sen S, Zeise L, Woodruff TJ. Cumulative effects of prenatal-exposure to exogenous chemicals and psychosocial stress on fetal growth: Systematic-review of the human
    and animal evidence. PLoS One 2017; 12:e0176331. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0176331](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0176331)
    PMID: 28700705

35. Jacobson LP, Lau B, Catellier D, Parker CB. An Environmental influences on Child Health Outcomes
    viewpoint of data analysis centers for collaborative study designs. Curr Opin Pediatr 2018; 30:269–75.
    [https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000000602](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000000602) PMID: 29474274

36. Margolis A, Algermissen M, Herbstman J, et al. Acute Stress Questions for ECHO COVID-19 Survey.
    PsychArchives 2021.

37. Association AP. Disgnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 5th edition ed2013.

38. Association AP. Disgnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 5th edition ed2013.


* * *

38. Bridgland VME, Moeck EK, Green DM, et al. Why the COVID-19 pandemic is a traumatic stressor.
    PLoS One 2021; 16:e0240146. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240146](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240146) PMID: 33428630
39. Horesh D, Brown AD. Traumatic stress in the age of COVID-19: A call to close critical gaps and adapt to
    new realities. Psychol Trauma 2020; 12:331–5. [https://doi.org/10.1037/tra0000592](https://doi.org/10.1037/tra0000592) PMID: 32271070
40. Logue JK, Franko NM, McCulloch DJ, et al. Sequelae in Adults at 6 Months After COVID-19 Infection.
    JAMA Netw Open 2021; 4:e210830.
41. Taquet M, Geddes JR, Husain M, Luciano S, Harrison PJ. 6-month neurological and psychiatric outcomes in 236 379 survivors of COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study using electronic health records.
    Lancet Psychiatry 2021; 8:416–27.
42. Kira IA, Shuwiekh HAM, Ashby JS, et al. The Impact of COVID-19 Traumatic Stressors on Mental
    Health: Is COVID-19 a New Trauma Type. Int J Ment Health Addict 2021:1–20. [https://doi.org/10.1007/](https://doi.org/10.1007/)
    s11469-021-00577-0 PMID: 34248442
43. Monteiro CA, Levy RB, Claro RM, Castro IR, Cannon G. A new classification of foods based on the
    extent and purpose of their processing. Cad Saude Publica 2010; 26:2039–49. [https://doi.org/10.1590/](https://doi.org/10.1590/)
    s0102-311x2010001100005 PMID: 21180977
44. Liu Y, De A. Multiple Imputation by Fully Conditional Specification for Dealing with Missing Data in a
    Large Epidemiologic Study. Int J Stat Med Res 2015; 4:287–95. [https://doi.org/10.6000/1929-6029](https://doi.org/10.6000/1929-6029).
    2015.04.03.7 PMID: 27429686
45. Braun JM, Just AC, Williams PL, Smith KW, Calafat AM, Hauser R. Personal care product use and urinary phthalate metabolite and paraben concentrations during pregnancy among women from a fertility
    clinic. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol 2014; 24:459–66. [https://doi.org/10.1038/jes.2013.69](https://doi.org/10.1038/jes.2013.69) PMID:
    24149971
46. Clausen PA, Frederiksen M, Sejbaek CS, et al. Chemicals inhaled from spray cleaning and disinfection
    products and their respiratory effects. A comprehensive review. Int J Hyg Environ Health 2020;
    229:113592. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2020.113592](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2020.113592) PMID: 32810683
47. Buckley JP, Kim H, Wong E, Rebholz CM. Ultra-processed food consumption and exposure to phthalates and bisphenols in the US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2013–2014. Environ
    Int 2019; 131:105057. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.105057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.105057) PMID: 31398592