RESEARCH ARTICLE

A clinical observational analysis of aerosol
emissions from dental procedures

OPEN ACCESS

Citation: Dudding T, Sheikh S, Gregson F, Haworth
J, Haworth S, Main BG, et al. (2022) A clinical
observational analysis of aerosol emissions from
dental procedures. PLoS ONE 17(3): e0265076.
[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076)

1,2,3☯ 4☯ 3,5
Tom DuddingID, Sadiyah Sheikh, Florence Gregson4, Jennifer Haworth,
1,2,3 2,3,6 1,2,8
Simon Haworth, Barry G. Main, Andrew J. Shrimpton7, Fergus W. Hamilton,
¶ 3,5
AERATOR group, Anthony J. Ireland, Nick A. Maskell9, Jonathan P. Reid4, Bryan
4‡ 1,2,3‡
R. Bzdek, Mark GormleyID \*

Editor: Markus Metsa¨la¨, Helsingin Yliopisto,
FINLAND

Copyright: © 2022 Dudding et al. This is an open
access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author and source are credited.

1 MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of
Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2 Department of Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School,
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3 Bristol Dental Hospital and School, University of Bristol,
Bristol, United Kingdom, 4 Bristol Aerosol Research Centre, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol,
United Kingdom, 5 Royal United Hospital Bath, Combe Park, Bath, United Kingdom, 6 Bristol Centre for
Surgical Research, Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, Bristol, United Kingdom, 7 School of
Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 8 Infection
Sciences, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 9 Academic Respiratory
Unit, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom

Accepted: February 22, 2022

Received: November 8, 2021

☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.
¶ Membership of the AERATOR group is provided in the Acknowledgments.
‡ BRB and MG also contributed equally to this work are joint senior authors.

- [mark.gormley@bristol.ac.uk](mailto:mark.gormley@bristol.ac.uk)

Abstract

Aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) are defined as any procedure releasing airborne
particles <5 μm in size from the respiratory tract. There remains uncertainty about which
dental procedures constitute AGPs. We quantified the aerosol number concentration generated during a range of periodontal, oral surgery and orthodontic procedures using an aerodynamic particle sizer, which measures aerosol number concentrations and size distribution
across the 0.5–20 μm diameter size range. Measurements were conducted in an environment with a sufficiently low background to detect a patient’s cough, enabling confident identification of aerosol. Phantom head control experiments for each procedure were performed
under the same conditions as a comparison. Where aerosol was detected during a patient
procedure, we assessed whether the size distribution could be explained by the non-salivary
contaminated instrument source in the respective phantom head control procedure using a
two-sided unpaired t-test (comparing the mode widths (log(σ)) and peak positions (DP,C)).
The aerosol size distribution provided a robust fingerprint of aerosol emission from a source.
41 patients underwent fifteen different dental procedures. For nine procedures, no aerosol
was detected above background. Where aerosol was detected, the percentage of procedure time that aerosol was observed above background ranged from 12.7% for ultrasonic
scaling, to 42.9% for 3-in-1 air + water syringe. For ultrasonic scaling, 3-in-1 syringe use and
surgical drilling, the aerosol size distribution matched the non-salivary contaminated instrument source, with no unexplained aerosol. High and slow speed drilling produced aerosol
from patient procedures with different size distributions to those measured from the phantom head controls (mode widths log(σ)) and peaks (DP,C, p< 0.002) and, therefore, may
pose a greater risk of salivary contamination. This study provides evidence for sources of

0.5{-}20,\\upmu\\mathsf{m}

(\\mathsf{D}\_{\\mathsf{P},\\mathsf{C}},p{<}0.002)

* * *

Academic Training PhD Fellowship. This research
was funded in part, by the Wellcome Trust \[Grant\
number 220530/Z/20/Z\]. For the purpose of open
access, the author has applied a CC BY public
copyright licence to any Author Accepted
Manuscript version arising from this submission.
Bryan R. Bzdek is supported by the Natural
Environment Research Council (NE/P018459/1).
The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.

aerosol generation during common dental procedures, enabling more informed evaluation
of risk and appropriate mitigation strategies.

Introduction

Transmission of respiratory diseases, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2), the causative virus for the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), can occur
through direct or indirect physical contact, droplet inhalation or airborne transmission \[1\].
Aerosols and droplets are created when the surface tension of a fluid is overcome by force, for
example from air turbines within dental drills \[2\]. High viral loads present in the course of
COVID-19 infection make dental aerosols a plausible source of infective particles \[2–4\]. A
recent study has demonstrated that asymptomatic patients attending dental care settings can
be positive for SARS-CoV-2 \[5\]. Understanding and managing the disease risk posed by dental
aerosols is important to protect patients and dental teams.
Aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) may result in respiratory disease transmission and

aerosols is important to protect patients and dental teams.
Aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) may result in respiratory disease transmission and
are defined as any procedure that can result in the release of airborne particles <5 μm in size
from the respiratory tract of an individual \[6\]. Recent work has shown that dental AGPs generate particles with a size distribution sufficiently wide to potentially incorporate SARS-CoV-2
virions (0.05–0.15 μm) \[7\]. Aerosol generated during dental procedures is of respirable size,
can remain suspended in air around the dental team \[8\], and is removed primarily by the ventilation parameters of the room. By contrast, larger splatter particles (>50 μm), often follow a
ballistic trajectory, and are rarely detected more than 2 m from the source during dental procedures \[9\]. Potential AGPs have attracted additional mandatory infection control practices,
including personal protective equipment (PPE), ensuring adequate ventilation and allowing
additional ‘fallow’ time between patients to enhance aerosol dispersion \[10\]. In dentistry there
remains uncertainty about which procedures constitute an AGP, with a recent systematic
review highlighting this evidence gap \[11\]. Previous studies suffer from inherent drawbacks,
using instruments with limited sensitivity to accurately detect aerosol, such as culture or settling plates, which do not account for the suspension of particles or those removed through
ventilation \[12–14\]. Others have employed simulation on phantom heads \[15, 16\], which may
not accurately capture the real clinical scenario. Some recent studies have used high-resolution
electrical low-pressure impactor particle sizers \[7\] and portable scanning mobility particle sizers \[17\], to capture the smaller aerosol particles (<10 μm) likely produced during dental
AGPs. However, this work has also been performed in phantom heads rather than on dental
patients.
For any dental procedure on a patient, there are three aerosol sources to consider. First, the

(>50,\\upmu\\mathrm{m})

(0.05{\ }0.15,\\upmu\\mathrm{m})

(<10,\\upmu\\mathrm{m})

For any dental procedure on a patient, there are three aerosol sources to consider. First, the
host (patient) aerosol generated during breathing, speaking, or coughing may be infectious to
the dental team in close proximity \[18\]. The second source of aerosol is the instrument generated aerosol, which is not considered infectious as there is no physical interaction with the
host. Finally, there is salivary-contaminated aerosol generated by the action of the instrument
in a potentially infectious host, which might be infectious. One challenge is separating this salivary-contaminated aerosol from the non-salivary contaminated instrument source. In this
study we quantified the aerosol number concentration, in the 0.5–20 μm size range, produced
during a wide range of dental procedures in a real-world clinical setting. We also aimed to
determine whether aerosol detected was intrinsically generated from the non-salivary contaminated dental instrument or was likely to be contaminated using aerosol size distribution analysis and modelling with phantom head controls. These measurements were conducted in
an environment with an aerosol background concentration low enough to reliably detect a
patient’s cough, allowing robust detection of any aerosol generated during dental procedures
\[19\].

Materials and methods

Ethical approval and patient recruitment

This study obtained ethical approval as part of the AERosolisation And Transmission Of
SARS-CoV-2 in Healthcare Settings (AERATOR) study via the Northwest Research Ethics
Committee (Ref: 20/NW/0393) and was conducted in accordance with the STROBE guidelines
(Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology). Adult patients >18
years old on waiting lists requiring either periodontal, oral surgery or orthodontic treatment
were recruited consecutively. Each patient was contacted via telephone, received an information leaflet via post, and provided written consent on the day of treatment.

Environment and equipment

An Aerodynamic Particle Sizer (APS) (TSI Incorporated, model 3321, Shoreview, NM, USA;
detection range: 0.5–20 μm diameter particles) was used to measure aerosol. A custom 3Dprinted funnel (RAISE3D Pro2 Printer, 3DGBIRE, Chorley, UK) made from polylactide, with
a maximum diameter of 150 mm, cone height of 90 mm and a 10 mm exit port, was attached
to the APS inlet using conductive silicon sampling tubing (TSI, 3001788), approximately 0.90
m long and 4.80 mm in diameter. The experimental set-up is shown in S1 Fig in S1 File. The
APS was set to sample aerosol number concentration once per second. Further detail on the
environment and instruments used can be found in the S1 File

Baseline patient measurements

We conducted an initial pilot study to investigate the optimum position and orientation for
the 3D-printed funnel when sampling dental aerosol. This was determined to be 22 cm from
soft tissue nasion to the top of the funnel, at approximately 45 degrees on the patient’s left side
(11 o’clock position). For every case, a full mouth examination was carried out using a dental
mirror, followed by local anaesthetic administration when indicated. Each patient received
3-in-1 syringe air drying (30 s), water (30 s) and then combined air and water (30 s) applied to
their all their teeth. When necessary, up to 3-minute intervals between procedural steps were
allowed for background reading levels to stabilise. The remainder of the treatment session was
dictated by clinical need. In keeping with real-world practice, wide bore high volume aspira-
-1 TM
tion at 300 L min was used during all procedures except oral surgery, for which Medi-Vac
-1
suction at 60 L min, with a Yankeur suction tip was used. A detailed description of the treatments and time-stamped protocols are provided in the S1 File.

Patient dental procedure aerosol measurement

* * *

Phantom head control procedure aerosol measurement

To measure aerosol generated by the dental instruments alone, we conducted high fidelity control experiments in triplicate, in a phantom head unit. For phantom head control data, the
aerosol number concentration and size distribution were extracted for further analysis. Further detail can be found in the S1 File.

Statistical analysis

Total procedure aerosol number concentration. The aerosol number concentration for
each procedure and baseline measurement were compared by calculating particle number concentration detected above background for each patient (irrespective of particle size). As the
length of procedure differed across patients, we sampled the mean particle number concentration across the sampling time for each patient and the per patient values were combined to
give median and inter-quartile ranges of total aerosol number concentration for each
procedure.
Procedure aerosol size distributions. The aerosol size distributions from the phantom

Procedure aerosol size distributions. The aerosol size distributions from the phantom
head control and patients were compared, with the assumption that if the distributions were
the same, all aerosol detected from the patient during the procedure could be explained by the
non-salivary contaminated instrument source (represented by the phantom control). For each
procedure, mean aerosol number concentrations (dN) for a range of particle size bins (Dp)
-3
were calculated by averaging across patients. These were transformed (dN/dLog(Dp)/cm) in
order to normalise the data, enabling visual comparison of the size distribution in a standardised form typical for reporting aerosol size distributions (Fig 1). For each procedure, the shape
of the phantom head control and patient size distributions were compared visually.
In the phantom head control, the model best describing the size distribution (highest r2)

\\left(\\mathrm{D}\_{\\mathrm{p}}\\right)

\\mathrm{(d N/d L o g(D\_{p})/c m^{-3})}

of the phantom head control and patient size distributions were compared visually.
In the phantom head control, the model best describing the size distribution (highest r2)
was identified by iteratively altering the number of modes (uni-modal, bi-modal, or tri-modal)
using S1 Supplementary Equation in S1 File. Once fitted, mode parameters (N, DP,C, log(σ))
were compared between patient and phantom head control as illustrated in Fig 1. Aerosol size
distributions inherently provide a robust fingerprint of source with different aerosol sources
yielding different log-normal distributions with different mean sizes and breadths/standard
deviations. This enabled us to attribute aerosols to specific sources e.g., phantom head or
patient \[21\].
To further assess if size distributions between the phantom head control and patient dif-

r^{2})

To further assess if size distributions between the phantom head control and patient differed other than by chance, a two-sided unpaired t-test was used to compare the mode widths
(log(σ)) and peak positions (DP,C). The mode amplitude parameter (N) was not compared as it

\\mathrm{(D\_{P,C})}

\\mathrm{D\_{p,C}} is highly dependent on variabilities in sampling efficiency, for example direction of the exhaled
airflow, which is not comparable across phantom head and patient sampling. After accounting
for multiple parameters compared across instruments (n = 26), a Bonferroni adjusted p-value
of 0.002 was used.

Results

Forty-one patients were included in the study with a median age of 47 years (range: 18–75) (S1
and S2 Tables in S1 File). The mean background aerosol number concentration across patients
-3
was 0.18 (+/- SD 0.12) particles cm (180 particles per litre). In total, fifteen dental procedures
were assessed during periodontal, orthodontic, and oral surgery treatments. Of these, examination with a dental probe, hand scaling, local anaesthetic delivery, routine extraction (with
forceps and/or elevator), raising a soft tissue flap, orthodontic bracket removal, alginate
impression taking, 3-in-1 water only, and suturing did not produce any aerosol (S3 Table in S1
File). For the other six procedures where aerosol was detected, the percentage of total procedure time that aerosol was observed was 12.7% for ultrasonic scaling, 24.8% for 3- in-1 air
only, 75.3% for 3-in-1 air + water, 40.1% for high-speed drilling, 49.9% for slow speed drilling
and 55.6% for surgical drilling (Table 1).

Aerosol number concentrations from dental procedures

The aerosol number concentration for each procedure is shown in Fig 2. Participant breathing
and speaking had similar number concentrations and size distributions to background aerosol,
indicating the background dominated the signal for these activities. High speed drilling pro-
-3
duced more aerosol (median 118.38 cm) compared to the other five procedures (ultrasonic
scaling, surgical drilling, 3-in-1 syringe air/ air + water, and slow speed drilling).

Aerosol size distributions inherently provide a robust fingerprint of source. Different aerosol
sources yield different log-normal distributions with different mean sizes and breadths. Therefore, a detailed analysis and comparison of size distributions from patient procedures and
phantom head controls enables identification of potential sources of salivary aerosol. The aerosol size distributions detected from patient procedures are shown alongside phantom head
controls on a linear scale (S2 Fig in S1 File) and a logarithmic scale (S3 Fig in S1 File). Distributions show that, within each procedure, the patient and phantom head have the same number

Table 1. Dental procedures for which aerosol was detected above background.

Some procedures were conducted in more than one patient.

| Procedure | Number of patients\* | Total sampling time for procedure(s) | Time aerosol detected above background(s) | Percentage time aerosol detected above background(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Ultrasonic scaling | 12 | 12,272 | 1,559 | 12.7 |
| 3-in-1 air only | 35 | 801 | 199 | 24.8 |
| 3-in-1 air+water | 33 | 772 | 581 | 75.3 |
| High speed drilling | 15 | 3,849 | 1,543 | 40.1 |
| Slow speed drilling | 15 | 3,324 | 1,632 | 49.9 |
| Surgical drilling | 9 | 568 | 316 | 55.6 |

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076.t001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076.t001)

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Clinical observational analysis of aerosol emissions from dental procedures

**Fig 2. Box and whiskers plot of total aerosol number concentration for baseline measurements (orange) and dental**

**procedures for which aerosol was detected above mean background value (green). The aerosol number concentration is reported** on a logarithmic scale. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076.g002)

of modes with similar mode widths (log (σ)) and peaks (DP,C) but different mode heights (N). Fitted size distributions for ultrasonic scaling, 3-in-1 air + water and slow speed drilling are shown in Fig 3, the remaining procedure fits are presented in S4 Fig in S1 File. We assessed how aerosol size distributions from patients may differ from the phantom head control for the same procedure. Such assessment enables identification of sources of sali- vary aerosol, relative to the non-salivary aerosol generated by the dental instrument. For ultra- sonic scaling, bi-modal fits to the patient and phantom head control data show a high level of agreement for the mode width (log(σ)) (Mode 1: p = 0.74; Mode 2 p = 0.87) and peak (DP,C) (Mode 1: p = 0.57; Mode 2: p = 0.71) between both patient and phantom head control (Fig 3A, 3B and Table 2). This indicates that the phantom head control data (instrument source) may account for all the aerosol seen during ultrasonic patient procedures. Similarly, data from sur- gical drilling, 3-in-1 air + water and air alone could be represented by bi-modal fits, with shape of size distribution curves similar for both the patient and phantom head controls. Model parameters were similar again, suggesting the aerosol detected arose from the dental instru- ment source (Fig 3C, 3D, S4a-S4d Fig in S1 File, Table 2). For high-speed drilling, both the phantom head control and patient data fit can be repre- sented by a tri-modal fit, with similar shaped size distribution curves (S4e, S4f Fig in S1 File). There was statistical evidence passing the multiple testing threshold that the size distribution modes were different between the phantom head control and the patients (log(σ)) (Mode 1: −5 −3 _p = 1.10 x 10_) and peak (DP,C) (Mode 2: p = 1.81 x 10), suggesting the patient aerosol size distribution may not be completely explained by instrument aerosol (Table 2). Slow speed dril- ling phantom head control data were best represented by a bi-modal fit, whereas three modes

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076) March 10, 2022 6 / 14

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Clinical observational analysis of aerosol emissions from dental procedures

**Fig 3.** Size distribution data for ultrasonic scaling (a, b), 3-in-1 (c, d) and slow-speed drilling (e, f). Mode 1 (red line),

mode 2 (green line), mode 3 (dark blue line) and cumulative bi- or tri-modal fit (blue line). 95% confidence band is shown as the red shaded area, n = number of procedures and error bars represent (± standard error). [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076.g003)

were required for the patient data. These aerosol size distributions are different from each other, with clear divergence below 3 μm and above 7 μm particle sizes (Fig 3E, 3F). This differ- ence in size distributions was reinforced as the parameters showed strong evidence for a differ- ence in Mode 1 (mean difference log(σ) = 0.17 (95% confidence intervals (95%CI), 0.13, 0.20), −8 −3 _p = 5.54 x 10_; DP,C= 0.35 (95%CI 0.16, 0.53), p = 1.65 x 10) and Mode 2 (mean difference −6 log(σ) = 0.03 (95%CI -0.01, 0.07), p = 0.22; DP,C= 0.56 (95%CI 0.40, 0.72), p = 1.89 x 10) (Table 2). Therefore, for slow speed drilling the phantom head control data do not fully explain what was observed during patient procedures.

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076) March 10, 2022 7 / 14

* * *

Table 2. A comparison of aerosol size distribution parameters between the phantom control and patient data.

| Procedure | Mode | Parameter | Phantom |  | Difference in means(95%CI) | P-value\* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Mean(95%CI) | Mean(95%CI) |  |  |  |  |  |
| Ultrasonic scaling Phantom n=3 Patient n=12 | 1 | Log(σ) | 0.10(0.05,0.15) | 0.29(-0.24,0.83) | 0.19(-0.90,1.29) | 0.74 |
|  | DPC(μm) | 0.73(0.67,0.79) | 0.62(0.44,0.80) | 0.11(-0.26,0.48) | 0.57 |  |
| 2 | Log(σ) | 0.18(0.11,0.25) | 0.15(-0.02,0.31) | 0.03(-0.31,0.37) | 0.87 |  |
|  | DPC(μm) | 1.66(1.41,1.90) | 1.82(1.40,2.24) | 0.17(-0.70,1.03) | 0.71 |  |
| Surgical drilling Phantom n=3 Patient n=7 | 1 | Log(σ) | 0.13(0.03,0.23) | 0.18(-3.13,3.49) | 0.05(-5.18,5.29) | 0.98 |
|  | DPC(μm) | 0.41(0.29,0.53) | 0.23(-5.12,5.58) | 0.18(-8.28,8.64) | 0.97 |  |
| 2 | Log(σ) | 0.14(0.10,0.18) | 0.20(-0.12,0.53) | 0.06(-0.45,0.58) | 0.81 |  |
|  | DPC(μm) | 0.78(0.56,1.00) | 0.55(-1.29,2.39) | 0.23(-2.68,3.15) | 0.88 |  |
| 3-in-1 air+water Phantom n=3 Patient n=37 | 1 | Log(σ) | 0.08(0.07,0.08) | 0.09(0.08,0.09) | 0.01(-0.01,0.03) | 0.34 |
|  | DPC(μm) | 0.65(0.64,0.66) | 0.65(0.64,0.65) | 0.00(-0.02,0.02) | 0.74 |  |
| 2 | Log(σ) | 0.22(0.19,0.25) | 0.18(0.15,0.20) | 0.04(-0.04,0.12) | 0.35 |  |
|  | DPC(μm) | 0.86(0.70,1.02) | 1.16(1.07,1.25) | 0.30(-0.01,0.62) | 0.07 |  |
| 3-in-1 air only Phantom n=3 Patient n=37 | 1 | Log(σ) | 0.15(0.00,0.31) | 0.07(0.04,0.11) | 0.08(-0.03,0.20) | 0.16 |
|  | DPC(μm) | 0.52(0.32,0.71) | 0.59(0.54,0.65) | 0.08(-0.07,0.23) | 0.32 |  |
| 2 | Log(σ) | 0.36(0.00,0.73) | 0.28(0.12,0.44) | 0.08(-0.26,0.42) | 0.65 |  |
|  | DPC(μm) | 0.72(-1.03,2.48) | 0.47(-0.08,1.03) | 0.25(-1.17,1.67) | 0.73 |  |
| High speed drilling Phantom n=3 Patient n=16 | 1 | Log(σ) | 0.16(0.15,0.17) | 0.12(0.12,0.13) | 0.04(0.02,0.05) | 1.10x10^{-5}$ |
|  | DPC(μm) | 0.66(0.65,0.67) | 0.65(0.65,0.66) | 0.01(-0.01,0.02) | 0.29 |  |
| 2 | Log(σ) | 0.19(0.16,0.21) | 0.18(0.17,0.20) | 0.00(-0.03,0.04) | 0.86 |  |
|  | DPC(μm) | 1.68(1.59,1.77) | 1.41(1.36,1.47) | 0.26(0.12,0.40) | 1.81x10^{-3}$ |  |
| 3 | log(σ) | 0.09(0.03,0.15) | 0.07(-0.10,0.24) | 0.03(-0.38,0.43) | 0.90 |  |

\\operatorname{L o g}(\\sigma)

\\mathrm{D}\_{\\mathrm{p,C}}\ (\\upmu\\mathfrak{m})

\\mathbf{L o g}(\\sigma)

\\underline{{\\mathrm{D}\_{,}\\mathrm{C}}}(\\upmu\\mathfrak{m})

\\operatorname{L o g}(\\sigma)

\\mathrm{D}\_{\\mathrm{P,C}}\ (\\upmu\\mathrm{m})

\\mathbf{L o g}(\\sigma)

\\mathrm{D}\_{\\mathrm{P,C}}\\left(\\upmu\\mathfrak{m}\\right)

\\underline{{\\operatorname{L o g}(\\sigma)}}

\\mathrm{D}\_{\\mathrm{P,C}}(\\upmu\

\\operatorname{L o g}(\\circ)

\\mathrm{D}\_{\\mathrm{P,C}}\ (\\upmu\\mathfrak{m})

\\operatorname{L o g}(\\sigma)

\\underline{{\\mathrm{D}\_{,}\\mathrm{C}}},(\\upmu\\mathfrak{m})

\\underline{{\\operatorname{L o g}(\\sigma)}}

\\underline{{\\mathrm{{D}{}\_{\\mathrm{{P}C}}\\left(\\upmu\\mathrm{{m}}\\right)}}}

1.10\\mathrm\ \\mathrm\ x10^{-5}

\\underline{{\\operatorname{L o g}(\\sigma)}}

\\underline{{\\mathrm{D}\_{\\mathrm{P,C}}\\left(\\upmu\\mathfrak{m}\\right)}}

\\underline{{\\mathrm{D}\_{P,C}\ (\\upmu\\mathfrak{m})}}

\\underline{{\\operatorname{L o g}(\\sigma)}}

5.54,\\mathrm{X},{10}^{-8}

\\underline{{\\mathrm{D}\_{,}mathrm{C}}},({upmu}\\mathfrak{m})

1.65,\\mathrm{X},10^{-3}

\\operatorname{L o g}(\\circ)

\\mathrm{D}\_{\\mathrm{P,C}}\\left(\\upmu\\mathrm{m}\\right)

Of the six procedures that generated detectable aerosol, the size distributions observed in
patients closely matched those observed in phantom head controls for four of them: ultrasonic
scaling, 3-in-1 air/ air + water and surgical drilling. In other words, we did not detect additional aerosol beyond that generated by the dental instrument alone, which is a non-contaminated source. Dental instrument aerosol could in principle be contaminated through
impaction and resuspension in the mouth or through coalescence with contaminated aerosol
in the oral cavity. However, aerosol coalescence rates within the dental aerosol plume are too
-3
small to be significant. For example, coalescence of 1 μm diameter particles at 100 cm con-
−16-1
centration proceeds with a coagulation coefficient equal to 3.4 x 10 m3 s, reducing the

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076.t002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076.t002)

0,3.4,\\mathrm{x},10^{-16},\\mathrm{m}^{3},s^{-1},\\mathrm{r c}

100,\\up{mathsf c m m}^{-3}\ \ \\updot{\\mathsf c}

Discussion

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Clinical observational analysis of aerosol emissions from dental procedures

particle concentration to only 99.999 cm -3 in 100 s. Even for coalescence of dissimilar size par- ticles (e.g., 100 nm particles with 1 μm particles), coalescence is so inefficient that the concen- tration changes by <0.1%. Therefore, if aerosol from the dental instruments cannot pick up patient biological aerosol by coalescence in the oral cavity (either respirable or resulting from the dental procedure), the only remaining alternative is that the aerosol from the dental instru- ment deposits in the oral cavity and then, having mixed with salivary components and poten- tially infectious virus, is re-suspended by the instrument. This process would generate an entirely new source of aerosol and be identifiable by the emergence of an additional mode in the size distributions. Because the patient and phantom head size distributions match well for these procedures, it is unlikely the measured aerosol is contaminated by patient biological material unless the new aerosol is generated at a concentration low enough not to be resolved from the size distribution of the instrument-generated aerosol. By contrast, with both high and slow speed drilling there were differences observed between the phantom head and patient aerosol size distributions. The presence of this unexplained aerosol suggests the generation of salivary aerosol and consequently the potential for viral transmission. Our study in patients supports findings from previous phantom head studies. Din et al. (2021), showed that orthodontic debonding using a high speed drill led to the most significant increase in particles, while combined use of the 3-in-1 air-water syringe did not result in any detectable increase in the aerosol levels. Similarly, Allison et al. (2021) and an N-of-one human volunteer study \[22\] found that ultrasonic scaling produces mainly instrument-generated aerosol. Similar to these groups, we found the amount of aerosol generated by ultrasonic scal- ing was low in comparison to high speed drilling (at least 10 times less) and intermittent, with no detectable aerosol for the majority of the time the instrument was in use. This may reflect the non-continuous use of dental instruments, that aerosol does not always escape the oral cav- ity, that aerosol is mitigated by use of high volume aspiration, or that there is directionality to the generated aerosol plume, which cannot be continuously sampled. Our study characterises aerosol generation during dental procedures but did not test for the presence of SARS-CoV-2, although aerosols and droplets are the vehicles that transmit SARS-- CoV-2. Observation of increased aerosol generation does not confirm the potential for patho- gen transmission, and it is possible we were unable to identify potential salivary aerosol if the patient size distribution were altered minimally from the phantom control or procedure gener- ated new aerosol at such a low concentration it could not be differentiated from that generated by the dental instrument. While some air sampling studies have detected viable SARS-CoV-2, others have not, and this remains technically challenging \[23–25\]. The use of time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF), fluorescein dye or salivary enzyme markers could be useful in determining if unexplained aerosol contains biological material from the patient. For dental instrument-generated aerosol to increase the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission, it must inter- act with saliva containing the virus, be of a size distribution that can contain SARS-CoV-2, withstand irrigant dilution, and ultimately go on to interact with a susceptible host. In this work, the background aerosol level was low for a typical dental surgery (0.18 cm -3 ), but still 50 times higher than can be achieved in a laminar flow theatre setting (Brown et al.

2021). Very low levels of aerosol (e.g., from breathing or speaking) were not clearly resolved \[19, 20\]. Nonetheless, we accurately measured aerosol size distributions to identify differences in patient data compared to phantom head controls. Many factors that are uncontrollable in a clinical setting (e.g., patient movement, differences in use of instruments by clinicians, specific tooth or quadrant treated) will affect the aerosol number concentration, but these would mini- mally affect size distributions. Both sets of experiments are comparable because the set-up for phantom head controls and patient measurements were the same, including relative humidity and temperature.
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076) March 10, 2022 9 / 14

* * *

While we investigated a wide range of dental procedures, it is not clear if these results can
be extrapolated to the same instrument being used for a different purpose (e.g., cutting a cavity
using a high speed drill) or different instruments performing the same procedure (e.g., piezo
surgery instead of surgical drilling). This study limited itself to aerosols in the 0.5–20 μm diameter size range, which includes respirable aerosol. The removal of aerosol in this size range is
mainly governed by room ventilation. The studied procedures may generate larger droplets,
which tend to behave more ballistically \[26\]. Particles smaller than those studied here
(<0.5 μm diameter) may potentially also harbour the virus as suggested by the findings of Liu
et al. \[27\]. However, Liu et al. report viral RNA copy numbers and do not investigate live
SARS-CoV-2 virus and so these may represent viral fragments. Evaporation may also occur
between aerosol generation and measurement, potentially altering the aerosol size distribution
\[28\].
It has been suggested that the use of the term AGP should be reconsidered \[29\]. For

It has been suggested that the use of the term AGP should be reconsidered \[29\]. For
instance, coughing can occur during any dental procedure (S5 Fig in S1 File) and may pose a
higher risk of viral transmission than many AGPs because coughing generates orders of magnitude higher aerosol number concentrations than many AGPs \[30–32\]. As SARS-CoV-2 viral
4 7
load could be between 10 to 10 copies per mL in the saliva of infected patients \[33\], the
potential for viral transmission may be governed primarily by the proximity of the dental care
professional to the patient, given the inevitable exposure to short range aerosol and droplet
transmission of respiratory aerosol. Similarly, AGPs and contaminated air between rooms or
open bay dental chairs could remain a source of contamination \[34, 35\]. There is a growing
body of evidence supporting the use of portable air filters \[36\] and air cleaners \[7\] as mitigating
measures to help reduce such risk, however further dental aerosol studies sampling specifically
for the virus are required. This study provides further evidence for sources of aerosol generation during common dental procedures, enabling a more holistic approach to risk assessment
\[29\].

10^{4}

10^{7}

Supporting information

S1 File.
(DOCX)

(DOCX)

Firstly, we would like to thank the patients who volunteered to take part in this study and for
recognising the value of this work. We thank all the management, administrative and clinical
staff at Bristol Dental Hospital and School for their logistical support with this study. In particular Ms Sarah Bain, Dr Julie Weeks, Ms Sarah Constant, Ms Becki Bullock, Ms Kuldip Bhakerd, Ms Ceit Scott and Mr James Tubman. We also extend our thanks to the nursing staff and
clinicians who assisted with the patient procedures, including Dr Alex Gormley, Dr Charlotte
Richards and the BSc Dental Hygiene and Therapy students. We would like to thank the Medical Equipment Management Organisation Clinical Engineering (MEMO) team at University
Hospitals Bristol and Weston Foundation Trust, Mr John Woods (Nuview Ltd.) for sourcing
and supplying the Jade SCA5000C Air Purification units (Surgically Clean Air©, Toronto,
Ontario) and Ms Adele Carter, for her assistance with arranging the phantom head simulation
equipment.
^ AERATOR Group members who contributed to this work include:

Acknowledgments

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Clinical observational analysis of aerosol emissions from dental procedures

James Murray Trauma and Orthopaedics, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK. Johannes Keller Bristol Eye Hospital, Lower Maudlin Street, Bristol, UK. Jules Brown Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK. Andrew Shrimpton School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Anthony Pickering School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Timothy Cook Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Royal United Hospital NHS Trust, Bath, UK Mark Gormley MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. David Arnold Academic Respiratory Unit, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK. George Nava Academic Respiratory Unit, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK. Sadiyah Sheikh Bristol Aerosol Research Centre, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Florence Gregson Bristol Aerosol Research Centre, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Fergus Hamilton Infection Sciences, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK. James Dodd Academic Respiratory Unit, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK. Ed Moran Academic Respiratory Unit, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK. Jonathan Reid Bristol Aerosol Research Centre, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Bryan R Bzdek Bristol Aerosol Research Centre, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Nick Maskell Academic Respiratory Unit, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK. AERATOR Group Leads: Prof. Jonathan Reid/ Prof Nick Maskell Emails: [j.p.reid@bristol.ac.uk](mailto:j.p.reid@bristol.ac.uk)/ [nick.maskell@bristol.ac.uk](mailto:nick.maskell@bristol.ac.uk)

## Author Contributions

## Conceptualization: Tom Dudding, Jennifer Haworth, Simon Haworth, Barry G. Main, Nick

A. Maskell, Jonathan P. Reid, Mark Gormley.

## Data curation: Tom Dudding, Sadiyah Sheikh, Florence Gregson, Jennifer Haworth, Fergus

W. Hamilton, Bryan R. Bzdek, Mark Gormley.

## Formal analysis: Tom Dudding, Sadiyah Sheikh, Florence Gregson, Simon Haworth, Jona-

than P. Reid, Bryan R. Bzdek, Mark Gormley.

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076) March 10, 2022 11 / 14

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Clinical observational analysis of aerosol emissions from dental procedures

## Funding acquisition: Fergus W. Hamilton, Nick A. Maskell, Jonathan P. Reid, Bryan R.

Bzdek, Mark Gormley.

## Investigation: Tom Dudding, Sadiyah Sheikh, Jonathan P. Reid, Bryan R. Bzdek, Mark

Gormley.

## Methodology: Tom Dudding, Sadiyah Sheikh, Andrew J. Shrimpton, Fergus W. Hamilton,

Anthony J. Ireland, Jonathan P. Reid, Bryan R. Bzdek, Mark Gormley.

## Project administration: Tom Dudding, Fergus W. Hamilton, Jonathan P. Reid, Mark

Gormley.

## Resources: Tom Dudding, Fergus W. Hamilton, Jonathan P. Reid, Bryan R. Bzdek.

## Software: Jonathan P. Reid.

## Supervision: Tom Dudding, Florence Gregson, Fergus W. Hamilton, Bryan R. Bzdek.

## Validation: Tom Dudding.

## Visualization: Tom Dudding.

## Writing – original draft: Tom Dudding, Sadiyah Sheikh, Mark Gormley.

## Writing – review & editing: Tom Dudding, Sadiyah Sheikh, Florence Gregson, Jennifer Haw-

orth, Simon Haworth, Barry G. Main, Andrew J. Shrimpton, Fergus W. Hamilton, Anthony

J. Ireland, Nick A. Maskell, Jonathan P. Reid, Bryan R. Bzdek, Mark Gormley.
**References**

**1.** World Health Organization. World Health Organization. Infection prevention and control during health care when novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection is suspected 2020 \[Available from: [https://www.who.int/](https://www.who.int/) publications/i/item/10665-331495.\
**2.** Wilson N, Corbett S, Tovey E. Airborne transmission of covid-19. BMJ. 2020; 370:m3206. [https://doi](https://doi/). org/10.1136/bmj.m3206 PMID: 32819961\
**3.** Jeong HW, Kim S-M, Kim H-S, Kim Y-I, Kim JH, Cho JY, et al. Viable SARS-CoV-2 in various speci- mens from COVID-19 patients. Clinical microbiology and infection: the official publication of the Euro- pean Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. 2020; 26:1520–4. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10). 1016/j.cmi.2020.07.020 PMID: 32711057\
**4.** Zhu J, Guo J, Xu Y, Chen X. Viral dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 in saliva from infected patients. The Jour- nal of infection. 2020; 81:e48–e50. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2020.06.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2020.06.059) PMID: 32593658\
**5.** Conway DI, Culshaw S, Edwards M, Clark C, Watling C, Robertson C, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Positivity in Asymptomatic-Screened Dental Patients. J Dent Res. 2021; 100:583–90. [https://doi.org/10.1177/](https://doi.org/10.1177/) 00220345211004849 PMID: 33779355\
**6.** Public Health England. Public Health England. COVID-19: Infection prevention and control dental appendix 2020 \[Available from: [https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/) uploads/attachment\_data/file/954834/Infection\_prevention\_and\_control\_guidance\_dental\_appendix. pdf.\
**7.** Ehtezazi T, Evans DG, Jenkinson ID, Evans PA, Vadgama VJ, Vadgama J, et al. SARS-CoV-2: charac- terisation and mitigation of risks associated with aerosol generating procedures in dental practices. Br Dent J. 2021:1–7. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41415-020-2504-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41415-020-2504-8) PMID: 33414544\
**8.** Szymańska J. Dental bioaerosol as an occupational hazard in a dentist’s workplace. Ann Agric Environ Med. 2007; 14:203–7. PMID: 18247451\
**9.** Shahdad S, Patel T, Hindocha A, Cagney N, Mueller J-D, Seoudi N, et al. The efficacy of an extraoral scavenging device on reduction of splatter contamination during dental aerosol generating procedures: an exploratory study. British Dental Journal. 2020.\
**10.** Public Health England. Public Health England. COVID-19: Guidance for maintaining services within health and care settings: Infection prevention and control recommendations. 2021 \[Available from: [https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment\_data/file/](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/) 954690/Infection\_Prevention\_and\_Control\_Guidance\_January\_2021.pdf.\
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076) March 10, 2022 12 / 14\
\
* * *\
\
11. Innes N, Johnson IG, Al-Yaseen W, Harris R, Jones R, Kc S, et al. A systematic review of droplet and\
    aerosol generation in dentistry. Journal of dentistry. 2021; 105:103556–. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdent](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdent).\
    2020.103556 PMID: 33359043\
12. Leggat PA, Kedjarune U. Bacterial aerosols in the dental clinic: a review. Int Dent J. 2001; 51:39–44.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1875-595x.2001.tb00816.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1875-595x.2001.tb00816.x) PMID: 11326448\
13. Harrel SK, Molinari J. Aerosols and splatter in dentistry: a brief review of the literature and infection control implications. J Am Dent Assoc. 2004; 135:429–37. [https://doi.org/10.14219/jada.archive.2004.0207](https://doi.org/10.14219/jada.archive.2004.0207)\
    PMID: 15127864\
14. Dawson M, Soro V, Dymock D, Price R, Griffiths H, Dudding T, et al. Microbiological assessment of\
    aerosol generated during debond of fixed orthodontic appliances. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop.\
    2016; 150:831–8. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2016.04.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2016.04.022) PMID: 27871710\
15. Allison JR, Currie CC, Edwards DC, Bowes C, Coulter J, Pickering K, et al. Evaluating aerosol and\
    splatter following dental procedures: Addressing new challenges for oral health care and rehabilitation.\
    Journal of Oral Rehabilitation. 2021; 48:61–72. [https://doi.org/10.1111/joor.13098](https://doi.org/10.1111/joor.13098) PMID: 32966633\
16. Veena HR, Mahantesha S, Joseph PA, Patil SR, Patil SH. Dissemination of aerosol and splatter during\
    ultrasonic scaling: A pilot study. Journal of Infection and Public Health. 2015; 8:260–5. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)\
    10.1016/j.jiph.2014.11.004 PMID: 25564419\
17. Din AR, Hindocha A, Patel T, Sudarshan S, Cagney N, Koched A, et al. Quantitative analysis of particulate matter release during orthodontic procedures: a pilot study. British Dental Journal. 2020; [https://doi](https://doi/).\
    org/10.1038/s41415-020-2280-5 PMID: 33184480\
18. Fennelly KP. Particle sizes of infectious aerosols: implications for infection control. Lancet Respir Med.\
    2020; 8:914–24. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30323-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30323-4) PMID: 32717211\
19. Gregson FKA, Sheikh S, Archer J, Symons HE, Walker JS, Haddrell AE, et al. Analytical challenges\
    when sampling and characterising exhaled aerosol. Aerosol Science and Technology. 2021:1–16.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826.2021.1917764](https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826.2021.1917764) PMID: 34732970\
20. Gregson FKA, Watson NA, Orton CM, Haddrell AE, McCarthy LP, Finnie TJR, et al. Comparing aerosol\
    concentrations and particle size distributions generated by singing, speaking and breathing. Aerosol\
    Science and Technology. 2021; 55:681–91.\
21. Hinds WC. Aerosol Technology: Properties, Behavior, and Measurement of Airborne Particles: John\
    Wiley & Sons; 1999. 262–3 p.\
22. Yang M, Chaghtai A, Melendez M, Hasson H, Whitaker E, Badi M, et al. Mitigating saliva aerosol contamination in a dental school clinic. BMC Oral Health. 2021; 21:52. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-021-](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-021-)\
    01417-2 PMID: 33546674\
23. Greenhalgh T, Jimenez JL, Prather KA, Tufekci Z, Fisman D, Schooley R. Ten scientific reasons in support of airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Lancet. 2021;1; 397(10285):1603–1605. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)\
    10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00869-2 PMID: 33865497\
24. Borges JT, Nakada LYK, Maniero MG, Guimarães JR. SARS-CoV-2: a systematic review of indoor air\
    sampling for virus detection. Environmental Science and Pollution Research. 2021; 25:1–14. [https://doi](https://doi/).\
    org/10.1007/s11356-021-13001-w PMID: 33630259\
25. Meethil AP, Saraswat S, Chaudhary PP, Dabdoub SM, Kumar PS. Sources of SARS-CoV-2 and Other\
    Microorganisms in Dental Aerosols. J Dent Res. 2021: 220345211015948.\
26. Micik RE, Miller RL, Mazzarella MA, Ryge G. Studies on dental aerobiology. I. Bacterial aerosols generated during dental procedures. J Dent Res. 1969; 48:49–56. [https://doi.org/10.1177/](https://doi.org/10.1177/)\
    00220345690480012401 PMID: 4887699\
27. Liu Y, Ning Z, Chen Y, Guo M, Liu Y, Gali NK, et al. Aerodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in two\
    Wuhan hospitals. Nature. 2020; 582:557–60. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3) PMID:\
    32340022\
28. Walker JS, Archer J, Gregson FKA, Michel SES, Bzdek BR, Reid JP. Accurate Representations of the\
    Microphysical Processes Occurring during the Transport of Exhaled Aerosols and Droplets. ACS Central Science. 2021; 7:200–9. [https://doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.0c01522](https://doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.0c01522) PMID: 33532579\
29. Hamilton F, Arnold D, Bzdek BR, Dodd J, Reid J, Maskell N. Aerosol generating procedures: are they of\
    relevance for transmission of SARS-CoV-2? Lancet Respir Med. 2021;S2213-2600(21)00216-2.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00216-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00216-2) PMID: 33965002\
30. Gregson FKA, Shrimpton AJ, Hamilton F, Cook TM, Reid JP, Pickering AE, et al. Identification of the\
    source events for aerosol generation during oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy. Gut. 2021:gutjnl-2021-\
31. [https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2021-324588](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2021-324588) PMID: 34187844\
32. Hamilton F, Gregson F, Arnold D, Sheikh S, Ward K, Brown J, et al. Aerosol emission from the respiratory tract: an analysis of relative risks from oxygen delivery systems. Thorax. 2021. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).\
    1136/thoraxjnl-2021-217577 PMID: 34737195\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S O N E** Clinical observational analysis of aerosol emissions from dental procedures\
\
**32.** Sheikh S, Hamilton FW, Nava GW, Gregson FKA, Arnold DT, Riley C, et al. Are Aerosols Generated During Lung Function Testing in Patients and Healthy Volunteers? Results From the AERATOR Study. Thorax. 2021. [https://doi.org/10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-217671](https://doi.org/10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-217671) PMID: 34728573\
**33.** Pan Y, Zhang D, Yang P, Poon LLM, Wang Q. Viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020; 20:411–2. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)) 30113-4 PMID: 32105638\
**34.** Yu IT, Li Y, Wong TW, Tam W, Chan AT, Lee JH, et al. Evidence of airborne transmission of the severe acute respiratory syndrome virus. N Engl J Med. 2004; 350:1731–9. [https://doi.org/10.1056/](https://doi.org/10.1056/) NEJMoa032867 PMID: 15102999\
**35.** Martos DM, Parcell BJ, Eftimie R. Modelling the transmission of infectious diseases inside hospital bays: implications for COVID-19. Math Biosci Eng. 2020; 17:8084–104. [https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe](https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe). 2020410 PMID: 33378934\
**36.** Conway Morris A, Sharrocks K, Bousfield R, Kermack L, Maes M, Higginson E, et al. The Removal of Airborne Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and Other Microbial Bioaerosols by Air Filtration on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Surge Units. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2021.\
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265076) March 10, 2022 14 / 14