RESEARCH ARTICLE

Occupational exposure to Brucella spp.:
A systematic review and meta-analysis

Carine Rodrigues Pereira1, João Vitor Fernandes Cotrim de AlmeidaID1, Izabela
Regina Cardoso de Oliveira2, Luciana Faria de Oliveira3, Luciano Jose´ Pereira4, Ma´ rcio
Gilberto Zangeroˆ nimo1, Andrey Pereira Lage5, Elaine Maria Seles DornelesID1\*

OPEN ACCESS

1 Departamento de Medicina Veterina´ ria, Universidade Federal de Lavras, Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil,
2 Departamento de Estatı´stica, Universidade Federal de Lavras, Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil, 3 Programa
Nacional de Controle e Erradicac¸ão da Brucelose e Tuberculose Animal, Instituto Mineiro de Agropecua´ ria,
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil, 4 Departamento de Ciências da Sau´ de, Universidade Federal de
Lavras, Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil, 5 Departamento de Medicina Veterina´ ria Preventiva, Escola de
Veterina´ ria, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil

Citation: Pereira CR, Cotrim de Almeida JVF,
Cardoso de Oliveira IR, Faria de Oliveira L, Pereira
LJ, Zangeroˆnimo MG, et al. (2020) Occupational
exposure to Brucella spp.: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 14(5):
e0008164. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal).
pntd.0008164

Editor: Tao Lin, Baylor College of Medicine,
UNITED STATES
Received: October 4, 2019

Received: October 4, 2019
Accepted: February 21, 2020

Peer Review History: PLOS recognizes the
benefits of transparency in the peer review
process; therefore, we enable the publication of
all of the content of peer review and author
responses alongside final, published articles. The
editorial history of this article is available here:
[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164)

- [elaine.dorneles@ufla.br](mailto:elaine.dorneles@ufla.br)

Published: May 11, 2020

Abstract

Brucellosis is a neglected zoonotic disease of remarkable importance worldwide. The focus
of this systematic review was to investigate occupational brucellosis and to identify the main
infection risks for each group exposed to the pathogen. Seven databases were used to identify papers related to occupational brucellosis: CABI, Cochrane, Pubmed, Scielo, Science
Direct, Scopus and Web of Science. The search resulted in 6123 studies, of which 63 were
selected using the quality assessment tools guided from National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and Case Report Guidelines (CARE). Five different job-related groups were considered
greatly exposed to the disease: rural workers, abattoir workers, veterinarians and veterinary
assistants, laboratory workers and hunters. The main risk factors and exposure sources
involved in the occupational infection observed from the analysis of the articles were direct
contact with animal fluids, failure to comply with the use of personal protective equipment,
accidental exposure to live attenuated anti-brucellosis vaccines and non-compliance with
biosafety standards. Brucella species frequently isolated from job-related infection were
Brucella melitensis, Brucella abortus, Brucella suis and Brucella canis. In addition, a metaanalysis was performed using the case-control studies and demonstrated that animal breeders, laboratory workers and abattoir workers have 3.47 \[95% confidence interval (CI); 1.47–\
8.19\] times more chance to become infected with Brucella spp. than others individuals that
have no contact with the possible sources of infection. This systematic review improved the
understanding of the epidemiology of brucellosis as an occupational disease. Rural workers,
abattoir workers, veterinarians, laboratory workers and hunters were the groups more
exposed to occupational Brucella spp. infection. Moreover, it was observed that the lack of
knowledge about brucellosis among frequently exposed professionals, in addition to some
behaviors, such as negligence in the use of individual and collective protective measures,
increases the probability of infection.

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

**Funding: This study was supported by Conselho** Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı´fico eAuthor summary Tecnolo´gico (CNPq) ( [http://cnpq.br/](http://cnpq.br/)), Coordenac¸ão de Aperfeic¸oamento de Pessoal de Nı´vel SuperiorBrucellosis is a zoonotic bacterial infection of major importance worldwide, affecting not (Capes) ( [https://www.capes.gov.br/](https://www.capes.gov.br/)) and Fundac¸ão only domestic animals but different wildlife species. Due to its ways of transmission, direct de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Geraisor indirect contact with infected animals or their contaminated biological products, the (Fapemig) ( [https://fapemig.br/pt/](https://fapemig.br/pt/)). APL, LJP and disease exhibits a strong occupational character. This systematic review addressed the MGZ are greatful to CNPq for their fellowships. main occupations affected by Brucella spp. infection, due to the regular exposure to aero- CRP thanks Fapemig for her fellowship. The sol and contact of non-intact skin (e.g. wounds and abrasion) with infected materials, funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation ofsuch as carcasses, viscera and live attenuated anti-brucellosis vaccines. The main risk fac- the manuscript. tors for the disease were identified, as well as the most common forms of exposure to the pathogen. In addition, the most frequently Brucella species isolated from farmers, abattoir **Competing interests: The authors have declared** that no competing interests exist.workers, veterinarians and veterinary technicians, laboratory workers and hunters were also described. The constant contact with the pathogen, the lack of information and instructions to occupational groups exposed, as well as the low adhesion to personal pro- tective equipment in the work environment are determining factors for the occurrence of brucellosis among these individuals.

**Introduction**

Brucellosis is one of the most common anthropozoonosis in the world, with approximately 500,000 new human cases reported annually to the World Health Organization (WHO) \[1\]. Accidental exposure of humans through the ingestion of dairy products made of raw milk, unprotected contact with infected animals or contaminated biological materials, and acciden- tal exposure to anti-Brucella spp. vaccines used in veterinary practice are the major forms of disease transmission, which has a strong occupational feature \[2,3\]. The worker groups most exposed to the pathogen are breeders and animal handlers, butchers, laboratory workers, vet- erinarians and veterinary assistants, and hunters \[4\]. In humans, disease caused by infection by bacteria of the genus Brucella is characterized by non-specific acute symptoms, such as fever, malaise, chills, weight loss and arthralgia. In some cases, brucellosis can evolve to chronic signs, which can affect a large number of systems and cause osteomyelitis, orchitis and endocarditis, among other manifestations \[1,5\]. Treatment of the disease is usually long and with strong side effects, intended to control the acute form of the ilness and to prevent the chronic one, with development of sequelae that may incapacitate the individual for work \[6\]. The administration of two synergistic antibiotics, doxycycline and rifampicin or doxycycline and an aminoglycoside, is normally recommended (among other possible therapies) and the treatment should last a period of at least six weeks \[7,8\]. Moreover, the discontinuity of chemotherapy is responsible for debilitating complications and relapses. On a global basis, brucellosis is one of the 20 highest-ranked conditions with impact on impov- erished people \[9\]. Damage caused by the disease in individuals’ quality of life is intangible and the economic losses attributed to the infection in humans are associated to the costs of hospital treatment, drugs and absence from work due to disabling feature of the disease in its severe form \[6\]. These damages are more intense in groups frequently exposed to microorganisms of the genus Brucella: the Disability-Adjusted Life Year (DALY), a metric that quantifies the bur- den of mortality and morbidity caused by a disease, were found to be 0.13 \[95% uncertainty interval (UI) 0.06–0.18\] per thousand persons per year in non-occupational adult and 0.29 \[95% UI; 0.08–0.70\] per thousand persons per year in occupational population (farmers, abat- toir workers and veterinarians) for human brucellosis in India \[10\], in which one DALY can be thought of as one lost year of "healthy" life.

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 2 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

The prevention of brucellosis transmission among occupations that directly deal with ani- mals or their products relies on effective defensive measures, as the adoption of personal pro- tective equipment (PPE) during activities involving the risk of Brucella spp. infection \[11\]. Manipulation of potentially infected animals, contaminated biological materials and live atten- uated anti-brucellosis vaccines are risk factors of remarkable importance for human brucello- sis; however, the more detailed knowledge about particular risk factors to each occupation, as well as the measurement of these risks is still scarce. In fact, there is a need for more accurate data on the epidemiology of job-related brucellosis to allow the implementation of more effec- tive preventive measures, which will reduce the impact of the disease in groups exposed by their work activities. The availability of these information could also be translated into health protection behaviors among susceptible professionals. Thus, the aims of this systematic review were (i) to identify high quality studies that reported and evaluated occupational exposure to brucellosis, (ii) to evaluate the main risk factors of each exposed group (rural workers, abattoir workers, laboratory workerss, veterinarians, veterinary technicians and hunters), and (iii) to estimate, by means of a meta-analysis, the odds of individuals occupationally exposed to Bru- _cella spp. become infected, compared to individuals not exposed to direct animal contact or_ their biological fluids.

**Methods**

The guidelines of PRISMA statement (Preferred Reported Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) \[12\] were formally adopted in this review and can be seen in additional file 1 (S1 Appendix).

## Search strategy

The search was conducted on May 16, 2018, without any date or country restriction. All the keywords were investigated within title, abstract and full text sections in the following data- bases: CABI, Cochrane, Pubmed, Scielo, Science Direct, Scopus and Web of Science. The PICO (population, intervention, comparison and outcome) used for the search were: veteri- narians, laboratory workers, farmers and abattoir workers (population), exposure to Brucella spp. (intervention), occupational and job-related (comparison) and brucellosis (outcome). An overview of the search terms is shown in additional file 2 (S2 Appendix).

## Selection of the studies

The literature search returned original papers published between 1931 and 2018. The database content was exported to Endnote X7.8, checked and cleaned for duplicates \[13\]. In the second stage, for those studies selected based on their titles (CRP), two reviewers independently evalu- ated the abstract of each paper (CRP and JVFCA). Subsequently, full text of the papers selected based on the abstracts were evaluated by two reviewers in terms of its relevance and by means of inclusion/exclusion criteria (CRP and JVFCA). When these reviewers disagreed over the inclusion or exclusion of a paper, a third reviewer was responsible for the final decision (EMSD). Further, the reference lists of selected papers were reviewed in order to find pertinent studies not identified during the initial search.

## Inclusion and exclusion criteria

The following characteristics were considered for the inclusion of articles: (i) articles focusing on Brucella spp., (ii) concerning occupational exposure to Brucella spp. or to brucellosis infec- tion in humans and (iii) written in English, French, Spanish and Portuguese. Articles aiming

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 3 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

on (i) animal brucellosis, (ii) genetics, immunology, microbiology or drug therapy were excluded. Full inclusion and exclusion criteria are shown in additional file 3 (S3 Appendix).

## Type of studies

Original papers, using quantitative or qualitative data, as cohort, case-control, cross-sectional and case series studies and case reports were included. Reviews were excluded and their refer- ences were identified through manual search in order to find relevant articles.

## Data extraction and quality assessment

Data were extracted from papers by one of the reviewers (CRP) and were subsequently checked for accuracy by other reviewer (JVFCA). Disagreements regarding data extraction among reviewers were solved by consensus. Extracted data included: first author, geographic location, study period, target population, number of positive individuals, study design, diag- nostic method and cutoff values, Brucella species isolated, identification of occupational expo- sure, predictors of transmission, potential risks factors for the development of brucellosis among high-risk groups and possible molecular confirmation from the source of infection. The case definitions described in each study by the respective authors were considered. The quality of cohort, case-control, cross-sectional and case series studies was evaluated using the quality assessment tools from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHI) and CARE (Case Report) checklist was used for quality assessment of case reports \[14\].

**Meta-analysis**

Case-control studies were selected to estimate the odds of individuals occupationally exposed to Brucella spp. become infected, compared to individuals without occupational risk. The homogeneity among the studies was verified using Cochrane’s Q test, and the total variability related to among-study variations was reflected in the τ2, which was estimated by the DerSi- moninan-Laird method \[15\]. The pooled odds ratio (OR) of the studies was obtained through a random effect modeling and by the adoption of the Mantel-Haenszel estimator \[15\]. The meta-analysis was performed with R statistical software 3.5.2 \[16\], using the meta package \[17\].

**Results**

The search strategy adopted identified a total of 6123 papers; 454 duplicates were excluded, and 239 full-texts were assessed for eligibility. Subsequently, 63 papers from 1962 to 2018 were included in quality level assessment and data synthesis appraisal, after a thorough review (Fig

1). The background characteristics (geographic location, study period, target population, num- ber of positive individuals, study design, diagnostic method and cutoff values, Brucella species isolated, identification of occupational exposure, predictors of transmission, potential risks factors for the development of brucellosis among high-risk groups and possible molecular con- firmation from the source of infection) were identified in these articles and are shown in addi- tional file 4 (S4 Appendix). The assessment of geographical origin on selected job-related brucellosis papers showed that seven studies were from Africa, seventeen from the Americas, twenty-two from Asia and seventeen from Europe (Fig 2A). Regarding to the year of publication, except for the 1970s, the number of studies published about human brucellosis with occupational feature increased every decade (Fig 2B). Indirect methods, as agglutination tests, indirect-ELISA, 2-mercap- toethanol, complement fixation, among others, were the main tests used to human brucellosis
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 4 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

**Fig 1. PRISMA Flow diagram of selected studies.**

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.g001)

diagnosis in the studies, which observed an overall of 1432 individuals occupationally infected. Moreover, the use of direct methods for the diagnosis, such as isolation and polymerase chain reaction (PCR), also revealed 112 positive individuals being infected with Brucella melitensis, _Brucella suis, Brucella abortus and Brucella canis, shown in additional file 5 (S5 Appendix)._ The Fig 3 shows the distribution of brucellosis cases by country according to occupational group affected (a) and the Brucella species most frequently identified (b).

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 5 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

**Fig 2. Geographical and temporal distribution of the selected articles included in the present study. (a) Distribution and frequency of occupational brucellosis studies**

published by country (performed with aid of online dataset: [https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Atlas\_of\_the\_world](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Atlas_of_the_world)). (b) Distribution and frequency of occupational brucellosis studies published by continent and decade, from 1962 to 2018. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.g002)

## Rural workers

Farmers, shepherds and livestock breeders were the leading groups affected by brucellosis, with 870 positive individuals described in twenty-four studies \[2,18–40\], of which the most part was carried out in Asia (n = 549), Europe (n = 180), Africa (n = 107) and the minority in America (n = 34). Direct contact with potentially infected cattle, goats and sheep during labor activities, such as calving, barn cleaning and herd vaccination, were described in the studies as potential sources of infection of Brucella spp. to rural workers (Table 1). Irrefutable evidence of animal- to-human brucellosis transmission was observed by a study conducted in Argentina, in which the same genotype of B. melitensis was observed in milk (n = 17) and colostrum (n = 11) samples from goats and in rural workers (n = 14) who lived near the animals \[38\]. Moreover, another study also identified that Livestock aborted remains from production animals were abandoned in the pasture and eventually ingested by dogs and pigs, in some properties in Angola \[33\].

## Abattoir workers

A total of 292 individuals working in slaughterhouses were described as brucellosis-positive in fourteen articles \[19,20,23,33,34,41–49\]. Most of those individuals were from America (n = 162), Africa (n = 60), and Europe (n = 37) and the minority from Asia (n = 33). The main type of pathogen exposure reported was contact with animal fluids, aborted fetus, placenta and viscera. Accidental contact with those materials was described in three studies: in Spain and Ethiopia, 12.26% (13/106) and 48.72% (76/156) of slaughterhouse workers, respectively, reported cutting themselves with dirty sharp blades \[45,46\], and in China, 100.00% (3/3) of pharmaceutical employees, who worked processing sheep placenta, reported having splashed animal fluids on their faces \[47\]. The great occurrence of direct contact with biological con- taminated fluids aroused the interest of several authors to understand which PPE were used or not by this group of professionals (Table 2).

## Veterinarians and veterinary assistants

Veterinarians and veterinary assistants showed to be largely exposed to Brucella spp., totalizing 189 individuals with positive diagnostic of brucellosis. Those infections, probably related to

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 6 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 7 / 19

* * *

Fig 3. Distribution of occupations affected by occupational brucellosis by country, including the and time period when the studies were performed, selected by this
systematic review (a) and the Brucella species identified through direct diagnostic methods (b).

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.g003)

their occupational activities, were reported by fifteen articles \[2,19,23,24,28,31,35,43,50–56\],
mostly from Asia (n = 121), Europe (n = 40), and Americas (n = 27) and the minority from
Africa (n = 1). Manipulation of live attenuated anti-brucellosis vaccines, described in seven
studies, was the most reported exposure source (Table 3). Of these, three were able to establish
an epidemiological link between the vaccine strain and the strain responsible for the infection
in the veterinarians: B. abortus strain RB51 was isolated from a surgical wound three days after
a self-inoculation \[2\]; B. abortus strain 19 was cultured from a discharge, from the injection
site, obtained on the eighth day after a needlestick injury \[54\]; and B. melitensis strain REV-1
was isolated from blood cultures of two veterinarians, several months after the accidental exposure \[51\]. In addition to this type of exposure, veterinarians and veterinary assistants also
reported to perform other activities associated with a high risk of infection, such as attending
parturitions and infertility cases, and handling aborted fetus, retained placenta and stillbirths
\[23,24,31,50\]. Furthermore, the use of PPE in some cases was considered inadequate \[43,56\].

Laboratory workers

Brucellosis related to laboratory practices was largely reported: 24 papers described this transmission in 183 individuals, of which the majority was from Asia (n = 98) and Europe (n = 49)
and the minority from the Americas (n = 36) \[19,20,28,31,57–76\]. The main factors possibly
related to the infection were working outside a safety cabinet, being at the laboratory during or
after an accident, failure suspecting brucellosis as a possible diagnosis and sniffing culture
plates (Table 4). Two papers reported infection of individuals working outside a laboratory
facility, but in indirectly related departments with the presence of Brucella spp. positive cultures within the environment. The first case was in a S19 manufacturing plant, where 21 workers were infected probably by the vaccine strain, in Argentina \[74\]; whereas, the second
occurred in a waste treatment plant, where an employee stuck his foot in a needle contaminated with the B. suis biovar 1 reference strain 1330 \[59\] identified by molecular genotyping
methods. The epidemiological link (biotyping) between the source of accidental exposure and
the patient’s isolate was also established in other reports of brucellosis among laboratory

Table 1. Farm animal species related to occupational brucellosis transmission among infected rural workers.

NR = not reported; USA = United States of America
† = Year of sampling

| Study | Year$\\dagger$ | Country | Total of workers | Contact |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Cattle | Small ruminants |  |  |  |  |
| \[2\] | 1998-1999 | USA | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| \[22\] | 2013 | Uganda | 19 | 0 | 19 |
| \[26\] | 2007 | Brazil | 2 | 2 | 0 |
| \[31\] | 2004-2013 | France | 11 | 11 | NR |
| \[33\] | 2012 | Angola | 32 | 32 | NR |
| \[36\] | 1969 | England | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| \[38\] | Not reported | Argentina | 32 | 0 | 32 |
| \[39\] | 1968-1969 | England | 1 | 1 | 0 |
|  |  | Total | 99(100.00%) | 48(48.48%) | 51(51.52%) |

* * *

Table 2. Not use of personal protective equipment (PPE) among slaughterhouse workers occupationally infected by Brucella spp.

| Study | Year$\\dagger$ | Country | Total of workers | PPE not used |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Gloves | Masks | Goggles | Boots | Apron |  |  |  |  |  |
| \[41\] | 2010-2011 | Nigeria | 54 | 2 | NR | NR | NR | NR | NR |
| \[43\] | 2014-2015 | Iran | 198 | 25 | 82 | 20 | 113 | 101 |  |
| \[44\] | 2009-2010 | Uruguay | 14 | NR | NR | 0 | NR | NR |  |
| \[45\] | 1998-1999 | Spain | 28 | 19 | 18 | 16 | NR | NR |  |
| \[46\] | 2013-2014 | Ethiopia | 156 | 29 | NR | NR | NR | NR |  |
| \[47\] | 2005 | China | 3 | 3 | 3 | NR | NR | NR |  |
| \[48\] | 2014-2015 | Argentina | 17 | 0 | 0 | 0 | NR | NR |  |
|  |  | Total\* | 470 | 78/456(17.11%) | 103/246(41.87%) | 36/257(14.01%) | 113/198(57.07%) | 101/198(51.01%) |  |

NR = not reported
the percentage was calculated based on the total individuals interviewed about PPE

the percentage was calculated based on the total individuals interviewed about PPE

† = Year of sampling

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.t002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.t002)

technicians in Switzerland (B. melitensis biovar 3) and Italy (B. abortus biovar 1) \[62,63\].
Moreover, the same biovar was also identified in 8 laboratory workers, during an brucellosis
outbreak in the United States of America \[73\]. Additionally, in France, the occupational brucellosis from 2004 to 2013 represented 46% of domestic cases (all laboratory exposure), and for
94.1% of the brucellosis-positive patients the respective paired strain was identified at molecular level \[31\].

Hunters

Job-related exposure was described in hunters in three papers, totalizing 10 infected individuals, from America and Europe \[77–79\]. Contact with animal fluid was reported, and in France,
B. suis biovar 2 was isolated from six hunters, all of whom reported not using any type of personal protective equipment while eviscerating the carcasses of slaughtered animals \[79\]. Furthermore, a frozen sausage and a tenderloin, from a feral swine hunted by two men (USA),
were positive for B. suis isolation, and had multiple-locus variable-number of tandem repeats
analysis (MLVA) signatures identical to a B. suis strain isolated from one of the patients \[77\].

Table 3. Adverse events or occupational brucellosis in veterinarians and veterinary assistants associated with accidental exposure to anti- Brucella spp. live attenuated vaccines.

NR = not reported; USA = United States of America

| Study | Year$\\dagger$ | Country | Total of workers | Vaccine strain |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| RB51 | S19 | REV-1 |  |  |  |  |
| \[2\] | 1998-1999 | USA | 19 | 19 | 0 | 0 |
| \[18\] | 1970-19731988-18892004-2008 | Georgia | 1 | NR | NR | NR |
| \[23\] | 2002-2004 | Greece | 41 | 0 | 0 | 41 |
| \[51\] | Not reported | Spain | 2 | 0 | 0 | 2 |
| \[54\] | Not reported | USA | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 |
| \[55\] | 1984 | USA | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 |
| \[56\] | 2015-2016 | India | 5 | 0 | 5 | 0 |
|  |  | Total | 70 | 19(27.14%) | 7(10.00%) | 43(61.43%) |

† = Year of sampling

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.t003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.t003)

* * *

Table 4. Types of exposure associated with occupational transmission of Brucella spp. reported by infected laboratory workers.

| Study | Year† | Country | Total of workers | Possible cause of infection |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Work Outside safety cabinet | Accident reported | Wrong diagnostic\* | Sniffed plates |  |  |  |  |
| \[57\] | Not reported | Saudi Arabia | 4 | 2 | 2 | 0 | 0 |
| \[59\] | 2014 | Spain | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| \[60\] | Not reported | Turkey | 3 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 3 |
| \[62\] | 1990-1991 | Italy | 12 | 0 | 12 | 0 | 0 |
| \[63\] | 1990-1991 | Switzerland | 2 | 0 | 0 | 2 | 0 |
| \[65\] | 1983-1990 | Saudi Arabia | 2 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| \[66\] | 1998 | Spain | 4 | 4 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| \[67\] | 1991-2000 | Saudi Arabia | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 |
| \[68\] | 2001-2002 | USA | 2 | 2 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| \[70\] | 2012 | Brazil | 3 | 0 | 3 | 0 | 0 |
| \[72\] | 1979 | USA | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| \[74\] | 1999-2006 | Argentina | 5 | 0 | 5 | 0 | 0 |
| \[75\] | Not reported | Argentina | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
|  |  | Total | 42 | 11(26.19%) | 23(54.76%) | 3(7.14%) | 5(11.90%) |

USA = United States of America

= Brucellosis not included as possible diagnosis by the clinician
† = Year of sampling

† = Year of sampling

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.t004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.t004)

Meta-analysis

Individuals who perform risky labor activities, such as farming, or employees from slaughterhouses and laboratories showed 3.47 \[95% confidence interval (CI); 1.47–8.19\] times more
chance to become infected with Brucella strains than people who develop other occupational
activities (Fig 4).

Discussion

Random effects model

Brucellosis is a worldwide widespread disease of great importance to public health and has a
strong occupational character, with certain professions being more commonly affected by the
disease \[4\]. Therefore, the efforts of this systematic review and meta-analysis were focused on
the understanding of the main risk factors associated with occupational brucellosis among
occupations considered to be more exposed to the agents. Our findings showed a greater
chance of infection among field occupations that have direct contact with animals and their
products, as well as indicated the main situations of risk and behaviors associated with

| Study | Year | Country | Experimental Events |  | Control Events |  | Odds Ratio | OR | 95%-CI | Weight |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Total | Total | Total |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| \[20\] | 1992-1993 | Yemen | 121 | 235 | 28 | 234 |  | 7.81 | \[4.88;12.50\] | 33.4% |
| \[34\] | 2005 | Iran | 63 | 150 | 44 | 150 |  | 1.74 | \[1.08;2.81\] | 33.3% |
| \[40\] | 1988 | Saudi Arabia | 85 | 150 | 45 | 150 |  | 3.05 | \[1.90;4.91\] | 33.3% |
| Random effects model |  |  |  | 535 |  | 534 |  | 3.47 | \[1.47;8.19\] | 100.0% |
| Heterogeneity: $ I^{2}=90%,\\tau^{2}=0.5186,p<0.01$ |  |  |  |  |  | 0.1 | 0.5 | 1 | 2 | 10 |

Heterogeneity: $ I^{2}=90% $ $ \\tau^{2}=0.5186 $ , p < 0.01

I^{2}=90%,t^{2}=0.5186,p<0.01

Fig 4. Forest plot of odds ratio for brucellosis among risk work groups (animal breeders, farmers, abattoir workers and laboratory workers) exposed and other
individuals not occupationally exposed to Brucella spp. during their labor activities. Year indicates the period in which study was performed.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.g004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164.g004)

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

infection for each evaluated profession. Information provided by this study is essential to design strategies to minimize the occurrence of occupational brucellosis and to guide specific health protection behaviors to people occupationally exposed. Although brucellosis is a widespread zoonotic disease, no high-quality studies concerning occupational cases from Oceania were selected, which could be explained by the low occur- rence of the disease in the region \[1\]. Likewise, the differences in the number and emergence of publications among the continents may be due to divergences in the structure of animal and human brucellosis surveillance systems and in the epidemiological situation of the diseases in animals (Fig 2B), since animal brucellosis precede and are closely associated with human bru- cellosis, especially occupational \[80\]. Moreover, the increased amount of publications from the 1980’s could be associated with the growing importance of the disease in humans and the development of new diagnostic techniques. In fact, the oldest publications selected were from countries that have implemented their animal brucellosis control and prevention programs in the 1910s, 1920s and 1930s, such as the United States and Canada, in the Americas, and Great Britain, in Western Europe \[81–83\]. On the other hand, some countries in Asia, Latin America and Africa, although presenting endemic animal brucellosis, have not yet reached satisfactory levels of disease control and often report insufficient data on the true prevalence of the infec- tion in humans and animals. Additionally, in those regions, poor interaction between human and veterinary medicine are generally observed \[6,84\], which could explain the later appear- ance of scientific publications from those areas among the selected papers. However, it is very important to mention that the number of infected individuals and the number of papers pub- lished by country do not have a direct relationship with the actual prevalence of occupational brucellosis in that locality, but is more related to scientific interests of local researchers. In fact, USA showed the biggest number of studies published, although is one of the countries with the lowest incidence of human brucellosis in the world \[1\]. The indirect methods were mostly common used for the diagnosis of brucellosis, which could be attributed to the lower cost of serologic tests compared to PCR and microorganism isolation, as well as to the safety issues and time saving process compared to bacterial culture \[85–87\]. Even though not widely used, direct methods have the great advantage of being able to identify the Brucella species responsible for the infection, supporting a better understanding of the etiopathogenesis of the disease among the different occupational groups included in this study. Rural workers are among the group most affected by brucellosis, mainly caused B. meliten- _sis, totaling 27 individuals with direct diagnosis of isolation and identification of the Brucella_ species, among the 870 cases observed in this group (Fig 3A). These results are especially important to public health, since B. melitensis is one of the most pathogenic and the most prev- alent species of Brucella spp. for humans \[88\], and the disease may progress to the develop- ment of debilitating symptoms, with severe involvement of multiple organs and systems, and high cost of hospitalization due to the prolonged therapy recommended \[89\]. The close contact of rural workers with small ruminants, preferred hosts for B. melitensis, was identified as the main form of acquisition of the disease among these individuals (Table 1), which has been con- firmed by the identification of a high genetic similarity between B. melitensis strains isolated from occupationally infected workers and from goat milk samples \[38\]. The second group most affected by occupational brucellosis (n = 292), mainly by B. suis (n = 21), followed by B. melitensis (n = 12) and B. abortus (n = 1) (Fig 3A), were butchers and abattoir workers, probably due to the regular manipulation of sharp objects and to close con- tact with potentially infected animals and their organs. Airborne and conjunctival routes were considered important to the transmission of brucellosis among this group \[90\], especially in closed places, such as slaughterhouses, in which direct contact with contaminated viscera and

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 11 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

secretions occurs. The hazard was increased when prophylactic measures were not properly adopted, as highlighted by the low adherence of PPE use, such as gloves, mask, googles, boots and apron (Table 2). In addition, the low educational level of abattoir workers, as well as insuf- ficient knowledge about brucellosis, particularly on its transmission and clinical signs, increases the risk of these professionals becoming infected and reinforce the importance of implementing educational measures to advise about the need to use PPE and to increase the knowledge of brucellosis symptoms and transmission \[41,46,47\]. Subsequently, veterinarians and veterinary assistants comprised the third occupational group most affected by brucellosis. In addition to contact with secretions and excretions of potentially infected animals, activities inherent to their work \[56\], these individuals are the ones with the most important exposure to Brucella spp. live attenuated vaccines (REV-1, S19 and RB51) (Table 3), which are a source of the infection for humans \[2\]. Accidental exposures to brucellosis live attenuated vaccines are especially important when they occur with RB51, since antibodies against this strain are not detected by routine serological tests and RB51 is resistant to rifampicin, one of the preferential drugs to treat human brucellosis \[91\]. In fact, the accidental exposure to brucellosis vaccines has great significance to brucellosis cases among veterinarians and assistants (n = 189), being confirmed by direct diagnostic methods that revealed Brucella spp. infection caused by B. melitensis (n = 3) and B. abortus (n = 2) vac- cine strains \[2,51,53,54\]. These findings strengthen the importance of use PPE not only in the care of animals, but also during the vaccination procedures. Laboratory workers represent the fourth group most affected by the Brucella spp. infection due to their labor activities. In fact, the highest incidences of laboratory-acquired infections were associated with Brucella species \[92\]. Interestingly, this group (n = 183) showed the great- est number of species isolated: B. melitensis (n = 33), B. abortus (n = 3) and B. canis (n = 1) (Fig 3A), which could be explained by the wide variety of clinical specimens that are often han- dled by those professionals in the diagnostic routine. Moreover, it must be considered that this group had the largest number of Brucella spp. strains isolated and identified among the occu- pations evaluated, probably due to greater access to direct methods of diagnosis in the environ- ments where they were occupationally exposed. The isolation of B. canis in a worker in this occupational group is noteworthy, as it was caused by the M- strain, a strain used for the sero- logic diagnosis of canine brucellosis that has reduced virulence in dogs \[75\]. Nonetheless, albeit generally well instructed about the risk of contracting a zoonotic infection during labor activities, many laboratory workers adopted attitudes that put their own health and of their colleagues at risk, as work outside safety cabinet and sniff the plates (Table 4). Brucella spp. cul- tures must only be handled in laboratories with biosafety level 3 or higher \[92\]; however, due the lack of specificity of the clinical signs caused by the disease, associated with the effective- ness of public policies in some European countries \[19,31\], where brucellosis occurs primarily among travelers, many physicians rarely raise the hypothesis of brucellosis when sending bio- logical samples for laboratory analysis, leading to exposure to the agent during manipulation of the clinical material by the microbiologist \[93\]. Misidentification of the organism also hap- pens and puts the health of individuals who manipulate cultures at risk \[63,67\]. Furthermore, accidents, as damages in the biological safety cabinet or the centrifuge, may also occur in the biosafety level 3 laboratory, reinforcing that training activities to the staff must be periodically carried out in order to ensure cautious manipulation of positive Brucella spp. cultures, as well as regular laboratorial equipment maintenance \[93\]. Indeed, adherence to rigorous infection control measures are important from the receipt to the proper disposal of biological materials, since in this occupational group not only microbiologists but also people working in the labo- ratory waste processing were affected \[59\].

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 12 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

The occupation with the lowest number of infected individuals identified was the group of hunters (n = 10), which differently from the previous groups exhibited exclusively B. suis iso- lates (n = 9) (Fig 3A). Hunting, a widespread activity in United States of America and in some European countries, such as France, is often associated with the primary route of transmission for B. suis in humans: through the contact and dressing of carcasses \[5,90\]. Therefore, the pres- ence of bacteria in the muscular tissues of boars is sufficient to cause infection in humans, especially when carried out without the proper use of individual protection measures. The occupational character of human brucellosis is supported by the results generated from the meta-analysis of 3 case-control studies, which showed that animal breeders, laboratory workers and abattoir workers were significant more likely to become infected with Brucella spp. strains than people who develop other job-related activities (OR 3.47; 95% CI: 1.47 to

8.19) (Fig 4). The low number of selected studies with a case control design (n = 3) observed among the articles resulted in the small number of high-quality papers eligible for meta-analy- sis. It occurred because of the impossibility of access to data of exposed and non exposed indi- viduals. However, it is important to take into account that despite the low number of studies used in the meta-analysis, the total number of individuals analyzed (n = 1069) and those with occupational brucellosis (n = 269) was considerable, supporting the robust results observed (Fig 4). Those data revealed the weight of exposure to Brucella spp. during labor activities for the occurrence of human brucellosis, which is essential to take into account for the design of strategies to minimize its occurrence. The greatest strengths of this paper are that it is based on the PRISMA statement (as recom- mended for conducting systematic reviews), that the search was performed in seven scientifi- cally validated and large databases and that the quality assessment of papers were through NIH and CARE guidelines, which allowed the accomplishment of meta-analysis and mitigated pos- sible bias among studies. On the other hand, there are some limitations, such as the differences among case definitions and diagnostic capacity of different studies, especially due to the diver- sity of diagnostic techniques employed, (see information on additional file 5 –S5 Appendix). Furthermore, some papers (n = 25) were not available despite all efforts through the university databases, scientific social media and request. The lack of accurate information on the quantification and peculiarities of the risk of bru- cellosis in each occupational group makes it difficult to direct public resources for the control and prevention of brucellosis in individuals most likely to present the disease, especially in a context with several other demands which also require a portion of the available funds, already limited. In this context, this systematic review provided a meticulous understanding of the risk factors peculiar to each of the main occupations (farmers, slaughterhouses, veterinarians, labo- ratories and hunters) closely related to Brucella spp. infection. Our results also revealed the great lack of information from these occupational groups on the importance of applying pre- ventive measures to minimize the risk of transmission of brucellosis during work. In addition, through meta-analysis it was possible not only to confirm the occupational character of brucel- losis, widely recognized, but also to quantify this risk in an unprecedented way in the scientific literature through the calculation of odds ratios, systematically compiling studies so far dis- persed in the literature. These data on human cases of occupational brucellosis can be used as a first step towards adopting a One Health approach, which is an interdisciplinary collabora- tion that aims to reduce the occurrence of zoonotic diseases in humans, through the preven- tion of such diseases in animals \[94\]. Thus, the control of brucellosis could be conducted more efficiently and strategically, in order to reduce the incidence of the disease not only in humans, but also in animals and in the environment. In conclusion, our results reinforced the strong occupational character of human brucello- sis, especially among rural workers, slaughterers, veterinarians and veterinary assistants,
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 13 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

laboratory workers and hunters, and revealed the specific risks associated with each occupa- tion. Moreover, it was observed that the lack of knowledge about brucellosis among frequently exposed workers, in addition to some behaviors, such as negligence in the use of individual and collective protective measures, increased the probability of infection.

## Supporting information

## S1 Appendix. PRISMA checklist.

(DOCX) **S2 Appendix. Extensive overview of search terms.** (DOCX) **S3 Appendix. Inclusion and exclusion criteria for selection of articles.** (DOCX) **S4 Appendix. Studies describing occupational human infection by Brucella spp..** (DOCX) **S5 Appendix. Number of Brucella isolation per worker category.** (DOCX)

**Acknowledgments** The authors are extremely grateful to Nammalwar Sriranganathan for his techinical support.

## Author Contributions

## Conceptualization: Carine Rodrigues Pereira, Luciana Faria de Oliveira, Andrey Pereira Lage,

Elaine Maria Seles Dorneles. **Data curation: Carine Rodrigues Pereira, João Vitor Fernandes Cotrim de Almeida, Luciano** Jose´ Pereira, Ma´rcio Gilberto Zangeroˆnimo. **Formal analysis: Carine Rodrigues Pereira, João Vitor Fernandes Cotrim de Almeida, Izabela** Regina Cardoso de Oliveira, Luciana Faria de Oliveira, Andrey Pereira Lage, Elaine Maria Seles Dorneles. **Funding acquisition: Luciano Jose´ Pereira, Ma´rcio Gilberto Zangeroˆnimo.** **Investigation: Carine Rodrigues Pereira, João Vitor Fernandes Cotrim de Almeida, Izabela** Regina Cardoso de Oliveira, Luciana Faria de Oliveira, Elaine Maria Seles Dorneles. **Methodology: Carine Rodrigues Pereira, João Vitor Fernandes Cotrim de Almeida, Izabela** Regina Cardoso de Oliveira, Elaine Maria Seles Dorneles. **Project administration: Elaine Maria Seles Dorneles.** **Software: Izabela Regina Cardoso de Oliveira, Andrey Pereira Lage.** **Supervision: Luciana Faria de Oliveira, Andrey Pereira Lage, Elaine Maria Seles Dorneles.** **Validation: Izabela Regina Cardoso de Oliveira, Andrey Pereira Lage, Elaine Maria Seles** Dorneles. **Visualization: Carine Rodrigues Pereira, Elaine Maria Seles Dorneles.** **Writing – original draft: Carine Rodrigues Pereira.**

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 14 / 19

* * *

**P L O S EN CE TGELDP ITC RA OLE AD SI SE S** Occupational brucellosis exposure

## Writing – review & editing: João Vitor Fernandes Cotrim de Almeida, Luciana Faria de Oli-

veira, Luciano Jose´ Pereira, Ma´rcio Gilberto Zangeroˆnimo, Andrey Pereira Lage, Elaine Maria Seles Dorneles.

**References**

**1.** Pappas G, Papadimitriou P, Akritidis N, Christou L, Tsianos EV. The new global map of human brucello- sis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2006; 6(2):91–9. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(06](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(06)) 70382-6 PMID: 16439329
**2.** Ashford DA, di Pietra J, Lingappa J, Woods C, Noll H, Neville B, et al. Adverse events in humans associ- ated with accidental exposure to the livestock brucellosis vaccine RB51. Vaccine. 2004; 22(25–
26):3435–9. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.02.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.02.041) PMID: 15308369.
**3.** Brough HA, Solomon AW, Wall RA, Isaza F, Pasvol G. Brucellosis acquired by eating imported cheese. Journal of paediatrics and child health. 2011; 47(11):840–1. Epub 2011/02/01. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j](https://doi.org/10.1111/j). 1440-1754.2010.01973.x PMID: 21276115.
**4.** Corbel MJ, Elberg SS, Cosivi O. Brucellosis in humans and animals. World Health Organization. 2006.
**5.** Pappas G, Akritidis N, Bosilkovski M, Tsianos E. Brucellosis. The New England journal of medicine. 2005; 352(22):2325–36. Epub 2005/06/03. [https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra050570](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra050570) PMID: 15930423.
**6.** McDermott J, Grace D, Zinsstag J. Economics of brucellosis impact and control in low-income coun- tries. Scientific and Technical Review of the Office International des Epizooties. 2013; 32(1):249–61.
**7.** Ariza J, Bosilkovski M, Cascio A, Colmenero JD, Corbel MJ, Falagas ME, et al. Perspectives for the treatment of brucellosis in the 21st century: the Ioannina recommendations. PLoS Med. 2007; 4(12): e317. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0040317](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0040317) PMID: 18162038; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2222927.
**8.** Yousefi-Nooraie R, Mortaz-Hejri S, Mehrani M, Sadeghipour P. Antibiotics for treating human brucello- sis (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012;(10):1–89.
**9.** Perry B, Randolph T, McDermott JJ, Sones KR, Thornton P. Investing in animal health research to alle- viate poverty2002.
**10.** Singh B, Khatkar M, Aulakh RS, Gill JPS, Dhand N. Estimation of the health and economic burden of human brucellosis in India. Preventive Veterinary Medicine. 2018; 154. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j](https://doi.org/10.1016/j). prevetmed.2018.03.023 PMID: 29685439
**11.** Dias EC, Almeida IM. Doenc¸as relacionadas ao trabalho. Ministe´ rio da Sau´ de. 2001.
**12.** Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, The PG. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA Statement. PLOS Medicine. 2009; 6(7):e1000097. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10). 1371/journal.pmed.1000097 PMID: 19621072
**13.** Analytics C. Endnote X7. Philidelphia: Clarivate Analytics. 2013.
**14.** Gagnier JJ, Riley D, Altman DG, Moher D, Sox H, Kienle G. The CARE guidelines: consensus-based clinical case reporting guideline development. Deutsches Arzteblatt international. 2013; 110(37):603–8. Epub 2013/10/01. [https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2013.0603](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2013.0603) PMID: 24078847; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3784031.
**15.** Schwarzer G, Carpenter JR, Ru¨ cker G. Meta-Analysis with R: Springer International Publishing; 2015.
**16.** Team RDC. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. 3.5.2 ed. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2018.
**17.** Schwarzer G. meta: meta-analysis with R. R package version 4.9–4 ed2019.
**18.** Akhvlediani T, Clark DV, Chubabria G, Zenaishvili O, Hepburn MJ. The changing pattern of human bru- cellosis: clinical manifestations, epidemiology, and treatment outcomes over three decades in Georgia. BMC Infectious Diseases. 2010; 10:346. [https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2334-10-346](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2334-10-346) PMID: 21143881; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3004911.
**19.** Al Dahouk S, Neubauer H, Hensel A, Scho¨ neberg I, No¨ ckler K, Alpers K, et al. Changing epidemiology of human brucellosis, Germany, 1962–2005. Emerging Infectious Diseases. 2007; 13(12):1895–900. [https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1312.070527](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1312.070527) PMID: 18258041
**20.** Al-Shamahy HA, Whitty CJ, Wright SG. Risk factors for human brucellosis in Yemen: a case control study. Epidemiology and Infection. 2000; 125(2):309–13. [https://doi.org/10.1017/s0950268899004458](https://doi.org/10.1017/s0950268899004458) PMID: 11117954; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2869603.
**21.** Ari MD, Guracha A, Fadeel MA, Njuguna C, Njenga MK, Kalani R, et al. Challenges of establishing the correct diagnosis of outbreaks of acute febrile illnesses in Africa: the case of a likely Brucella outbreak among nomadic pastoralists, northeast Kenya, March-July 2005. The American journal of tropical
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008164) May 11, 2020 15 / 19 medicine and hygiene. 2011; 85(5):909–12. Epub 2011/11/04. [https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2011.11-](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2011.11-)
0030 PMID: 22049048; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3205640.
22\. Asiimwe BB, Kansiime C, Rwego IB. Risk factors for human brucellosis in agro-pastoralist communities
of south western Uganda: a case-control study. BMC Research Notes. 2015; 8. [https://doi.org/10.1186/](https://doi.org/10.1186/)
s13104-015-1361-z PMID: 26337599; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4559326.
23\. Avdikou I, Maipa V, Alamanos Y. Epidemiology of human brucellosis in a defined area of Northwestern
Greece. Epidemiology and Infection. 2005; 133(5):905–10. Epub 2005/09/27. [https://doi.org/10.1017/](https://doi.org/10.1017/)
S0950268805003973 PMID: 16181512; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2870323.
24\. Cash-Goldwasser S, Maze MJ, Rubach MP, Biggs HM, Stoddard RA, Sharples KJ, et al. Risk factors
for human brucellosis in northern Tanzania. The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene.
2018; 98(2):598–606. [https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.17-0125](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.17-0125) PMID: 29231152; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC5929176.
25\. Dean AS, Bonfoh B, Kulo AE, Boukaya GA, Amidou M, Hattendorf J, et al. Epidemiology of brucellosis
and Q fever in linked human and animal populations in northern Togo. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8(8). https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0071501 PMID: 23951177; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3741174.
26\. Gonc¸alves DD, Benitez A, Lopes-Mori FMR, Alves LA, Freire RL, Navarro IT, et al. Zoonoses in
humans from small rural properties in Jataizinho, Parana, Brazil. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology.
2013; 44(1):125–31. [https://doi.org/10.1590/S1517-83822013005000011](https://doi.org/10.1590/S1517-83822013005000011) PMID: 24159294; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC3804188.
27\. Guney F, Gumus H, Ogmegul A, Kandemir B, Emlik D, Arslan U, et al. First case report of neurobrucellosis associated with hydrocephalus. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery. 2008; 110(7):739–42.
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2008.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2008.04.002) PMID: 18499339
28\. Hasanjani Roushan MR, Mohrez M, Smailnejad Gangi SM, Soleimani Amiri MJ, Hajiahmadi M. Epidemiological features and clinical manifestations in 469 adult patients with brucellosis in Babol, Northern
Iran. Epidemiology and Infection. 2004; 132(6):1109–14. [https://doi.org/10.1017/s0950268804002833](https://doi.org/10.1017/s0950268804002833)
PMID: 15635968
29\. Jia B, Zhang F, Pang P, Zhang T, Zheng R, Zhang W, et al. Brucella endocarditis: clinical features and
treatment outcomes of 10 cases from Xinjiang, China. Journal of Infection. 2017; 74(5):512–4. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2017.01.011 PMID: 28143754
30\. Kozukeev TB, Ajeilat S, Maes E, Favorov M. Risk factors for brucellosis. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report. 2006; 55(Supplement):31–4. PMID: 16424854
31\. Mailles A, Garin-Bastuji B, Lavigne JP, Jay M, Sotto A, Maurin M, et al. Human brucellosis in France in
the 21st century: Results from national surveillance 2004–2013. Me´ decine et Maladies Infectieuses.
2016; 46(8):411–8. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medmal.2016.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medmal.2016.08.007) PMID: 27717526
32\. Mousa AR, Elhag KM, Khogali M, Marafie AA. The nature of human brucellosis in Kuwait: study of 379
cases. Reviews of infectious diseases. 1988; 10(1):211–7. Epub 1988/01/01. [https://doi.org/10.1093/](https://doi.org/10.1093/)
clinids/10.1.211 PMID: 3353631.
33\. Mufinda FC, Boinas F, Nunes C. Prevalence and factors associated with human brucellosis in livestock
professionals. Revista de Sau´ de Pu´ blica. 2017; 51. [https://doi.org/10.1590/s1518-8787](https://doi.org/10.1590/s1518-8787).
2017051006051 PMID: 28658364; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5493365.
34\. Sofian M, Aghakhani A, Velayati AA, Banifazl M, Eslamifar A, Ramezani A. Risk factors for human brucellosis in Iran: a case-control study. International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2008; 12(2):157–61.
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2007.04.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2007.04.019) PMID: 17698385
35\. Strbac M, Ristic M, Petrovic V, Savic S, Ilic S, Medic S, et al. Epidemiological characteristics of brucellosis in Vojvodina, Serbia, 2000–2014. Vojnosanitetski Pregled. 2017; 74(12):1140–7. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
2298/vsp160212311s WOS:000417270100007.
36\. Tee G. Subclinical Brucella infection in man. British Medical Journal. 1972; 3(5823):416. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.1136/bmj.3.5823.416 PMID: 4627094; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1785465.
37\. Thomas DR, Salmon RL, Coleman TJ, Morgan-Capner P, Sillis M, Caul EO, et al. Occupational exposure to animals and risk of zoonotic illness in a cohort of farmers, farmworkers, and their families in
England. Journal of Agricultural Safety and Health. 1999; 5(4):373–82.
38\. Wallach JC, Samartino LE, Efron A, Baldi PC. Human infection by Brucella melitensis: an outbreak
attributed to contact with infected goats. FEMS Immunology and Medical Microbiology. 1997; 19
(4):315–21. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-695X.1997.tb01102.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-695X.1997.tb01102.x) PMID: 9537757
39\. Williams E. Brucellosis and the british farmer. The Lancet. 1970; 295(7647):604–6. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
1016/S0140-6736(70)91639-9.
40\. Cooper CW. Risk factors in transmission of brucellosis from animals to humans in Saudi Arabia. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 1992; 86(2):206–9. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
1016/0035-9203(92)90575-w PMID: 1440791

* * *

41. Aworh MK, Okolocha E, Kwaga J, Fasina F, Lazarus D, Suleman I, et al. Human brucellosis: Seroprevalence and associated exposure factors among abattoir workers in Abuja, Nigeria—2011. Pan African
    Medical Journal. 2013; 16. [https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2013.16.103.2143](https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2013.16.103.2143) PMID: 24876892
42. Hendricks SL, Borts IH, Heeren RH, Hausler WJ, Held JR. Brucellosis outbreak in an Iowa packing
    house. American Journal of Public Health and the Nation’s Health. 1962; 52(7):1166–78. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
    10.2105/ajph.52.7.1166 PMID: 13906425.
43. Mamani M, Majzoobi MM, Keramat F, Varmaghani N, Moghimbeigi A. Seroprevalence of brucellosis in
    butchers, veterinarians and slaughterhouse workers in Hamadan, western Iran. Journal of Research in
    Health Sciences. 2018; 18(1).
44. Pisani A, Vacarezza M, Tomasina F. Study of 14 cases of brucellosis in workers of a refrigerator as an
    occupational disease, Uruguay 2009–2010. Revista Medica del Uruguay. 2017; 33(3):168–73.
    WOS:000423908800003.
45. Rodrı´guez Valı´n ME, Pousa Ortega A, Pons Sa´ nchez C, Larrosa Montañe´ s A, Sa´ nchez Serrano LP,
    Martı´nez Navarro F. La brucelosis como enfermedad profesional: estudio de un brote de transmision
    aerea en un matadero. Revista Española de Salud Pu´ blica. 2001; 75(2):159–70. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1590/S1135-57272001000200008 PMID: 11400426
46. Tsegay A, Tuli G, Kassa T, Kebede N. Seroprevalence and risk factors of brucellosis in abattoir workers
    at Debre Zeit and Modjo export abattoir, central Ethiopia. BMC Infectious Diseases. 2017; 17. https://
    doi.org/10.1186/s12879-017-2208-0 WOS:000397347600004. PMID: 28125966
47. Zhan BD, Wang SQ, Lai SM, Lu Y, Shi XG, Cao GP, et al. Outbreak of occupational brucellosis at a
    pharmaceutical factory in southeast China. Zoonoses and Public Health. 2017; 64(6):431–7. [https://doi](https://doi/).
    org/10.1111/zph.12322 PMID: 27863096
48. Wallach JC, Garcı´a JL, Cardinali PS, Seijo AP, Benchetrit AG, Echazarreta SE, et al. High incidence of
    respiratory involvement in a cluster of Brucella suis infected workers from a pork processing plant in
    Argentina. Zoonoses and Public Health. 2017; 64(7):550–3. [https://doi.org/10.1111/zph.12339](https://doi.org/10.1111/zph.12339) PMID:
    28032696
49. Bourne FM, Starkey DH, Turner LJ. Brucellosis in a Veterans’ Hospital, 1963. Canadian Medical Association Journal. 1964; 91(22):1139–45. PMID: 14221779; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1928450.
50. Arlett PR. A case of laboratory acquired brucellosis. BMJ: British Medical Journal. 1996; 313
    (7065):1130–2. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.313.7065.1130](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.313.7065.1130) PMID: 8916703; PubMed Central PMCID:
    PMC2352457.
51. Blasco JM, Dı´az R. Brucella melitensis Rev-1 vaccine as a cause of human brucellosis. The Lancet.
    1993; 342(8874):805. [https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(93)91571-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(93)91571-3).
52. Bosilkovski M, Stojanov A, Stevanovic M, Karadzovski Z, Krstevski K. Impact of measures to control
    brucellosis on disease characteristics in humans: experience from an endemic region in the Balkans.
    Infectious Diseases. 2018; 50(5):340–5. [https://doi.org/10.1080/23744235.2017.1407037](https://doi.org/10.1080/23744235.2017.1407037) PMID:
    29192529
53. Campbell JI, Lan NPH, Phuong PM, Chau LB, Trung Pham D, Guzma´ n-Verri C, et al. Human Brucella
    melitensis infections in southern Vietnam. Clinical Microbiology and Infection. 2017; 23(11):788–90.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2017.06.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2017.06.028) PMID: 28669842
54. Joffe B, Diamond M. Brucellosis due to self-inoculation. Annals of Internal Medicine. 1966; 65(3):564–5.
    [https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-65-3-564](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-65-3-564) PMID: 5911749
55. Nicoletti P, Ring J, Boysen B, Buczek J. Illness in a veterinary student following accidental inoculation of
    Brucella abortus strain 19. Journal of American college health: J of ACH. 1986; 34(5):236–7. Epub
    1986/04/01. [https://doi.org/10.1080/07448481.1986.9938944](https://doi.org/10.1080/07448481.1986.9938944) PMID: 3086415.
56. Proch V, Singh BB, Schemann K, Gill JPS, Ward MP, Dhand NK. Risk factors for occupational Brucella
    infection in veterinary personnel in India. Transboundary and emerging diseases. 2018; 65(3):791–8.
    Epub 2018/01/25. [https://doi.org/10.1111/tbed.12804](https://doi.org/10.1111/tbed.12804) PMID: 29363286.
57. Al-Aska AK, Chagla AH. Laboratory-acquired brucellosis. Journal of Hospital Infection. 1989; 14(1):69–
58. [https://doi.org/10.1016/0195-6701(89)90136-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/0195-6701(89)90136-9) PMID: 2570105
59. Čekanac R, Mladenović J, Ristanović E, Lazić S. Epidemiological characteristics of brucellosis in Serbia, 1980–2008. Croatian Medical Journal. 2010; 51(4):337–44. [https://doi.org/10.3325/cmj.2010.51](https://doi.org/10.3325/cmj.2010.51).
    337 PMID: 20718087; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2931439.
60. Compes Dea C, Bescos JG, Agreda JPAP, Alvaro PMM, Blasco Martinez JM, Villuendas Uson MC.
    Epidemiological investigation of the first human brucellosis case in Spain due to Brucella suis biovar 1
    strain 1330. Enfermedades infecciosas y microbiologia clinica. 2017; 35(3):179–81. Epub 2016/07/31.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eimc.2016.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eimc.2016.06.005) PMID: 27474211.
61. Demirdal T, Demirturk N. Laboratory-acquired brucellosis. Annals Academy of Medicine. 2008; 37(1).

* * *

61. Ergonul O, Celikbas A, Tezeren D, Guvener E, Dokuzoguz B. Analysis of risk factors for laboratoryacquired Brucella infections. The Journal of hospital infection. 2004; 56(3):223–7. Epub 2004/03/09.
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2003.12.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2003.12.020) PMID: 15003671.
62. Fiori PL, Mastrandrea S, Rappelli P, Cappuccinelli P. Brucella abortus infection acquired in microbiology
    laboratories. Journal of clinical microbiology. 2000; 38(5):2005–6. Epub 2000/05/02. PMID: 10790142;
    PubMed Central PMCID: PMC86653.
63. Gruner E, Bernasconi E, Galeazzi RL, Buhl D, Heinzle R, Nadal D. Brucellosis: an occupational hazard
    for medical laboratory personnel. Report of five cases. Infection. 1994; 22(1):33–6. Epub 1994/01/01.
    [https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01780762](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01780762) PMID: 8181839.
64. Hartady T, Saad MZ, Bejo SK, Salisi MS. Clinical human brucellosis in Malaysia: a case report. Asian
    Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease. 2014; 4(2):150–3. [https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S2222-](https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S2222-)
    1808(14)60332-7.
65. Kiel FW, Khan MY. Brucellosis among hospital employees in Saudi Arabia. Infection control and hospital epidemiology. 1993; 14(5):268–72. Epub 1993/05/01. [https://doi.org/10.1086/646733](https://doi.org/10.1086/646733) PMID:
67. Martin-Mazuelos E, Nogales MC, Florez C, Gomez-Mateos JM, Lozano F, Sanchez A. Outbreak of Brucella melitensis among microbiology laboratory workers. Journal of clinical microbiology. 1994; 32
    (8):2035–6. Epub 1994/08/01. PMID: 7989566; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC263928.
68. Memish ZA, Mah MW. Brucellosis in laboratory workers at a Saudi Arabian hospital. American journal
    of infection control. 2001; 29(1):48–52. Epub 2001/02/15. [https://doi.org/10.1067/mic.2001.111374](https://doi.org/10.1067/mic.2001.111374)
    PMID: 11172318.
69. Noviello S, Gallo R, Kelly M, Limberger RJ, DeAngelis K, Cain L, et al. Laboratory-acquired brucellosis.
    Emerging infectious diseases. 2004; 10(10):1848–50. [https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1010.040076](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1010.040076) PMID:
71. Ozaras R, Celik AD, Demirel A. Acute hepatitis due to brucellosis in a laboratory technician. European
    journal of internal medicine. 2004; 15(4):264. Epub 2004/08/04. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2004.04](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2004.04).
    010 PMID: 15288685.
72. Rodrigues ALC, Silva SKL, Pinto BLA, Silva JB, Tupinambas U. Outbreak of laboratory-acquired Brucella abortus in Brazil: a case report. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2013; 46(6):791–4. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).
    1590/0037-8682-0160-2013 PMID: 24474027
73. Sam IC, Karunakaran R, Kamarulzaman A, Ponnampalavanar S, Syed Omar SF, Ng KP, et al. A large
    exposure to Brucella melitensis in a diagnostic laboratory. Journal of Hospital Infection. 2012; 80
    (4):321–5. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2011.12.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2011.12.004) PMID: 22237130
74. Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Andersen RG. Brucellosis in a laboratory technologist. Canadian Medical
    Association Journal. 1980; 122.
75. Staszkiewicz J, Lewis CM, Colville J, Zervos M, Band J. Outbreak of Brucella melitensis among microbiology laboratory workers in a community hospital. Journal of clinical microbiology. 1991; 29(2):287–90.
    Epub 1991/02/01. PMID: 2007637; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC269755.
76. Wallach JC, Ferrero MC, Victoria Delpino M, Fossati CA, Baldi PC. Occupational infection due to Brucella abortus S19 among workers involved in vaccine production in Argentina. Clinical microbiology and
    infection: the official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. 2008; 14(8):805–7. Epub 2008/08/30. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2008.02029.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2008.02029.x) PMID:
78. Wallach JC, Giambartolomei GH, Baldi PC, Fossati CA. Human infection with M-strain of Brucella
    canis. Emerging infectious diseases. 2004; 10(1):146–8. [https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1001.020622](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1001.020622)
    PMID: 15078613.
79. Yagupsky P, Peled N, Riesenberg K, Banai M. Exposure of hospital personnel to Brucella melitensis
    and occurrence of laboratory-acquired disease in an endemic area. Scandinavian journal of infectious
    diseases. 2000; 32(1):31–5. Epub 2000/03/15. [https://doi.org/10.1080/00365540050164182](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365540050164182) PMID:
81. CDC. Brucella suis infection associated with feral swine hunting—three states, 2007–2008. MMWR
    Morbidity and mortality weekly report. 2009; 58(22):618–21. Epub 2009/06/13. PMID: 19521334.
82. Gelfand MS, Cleveland KO, Buechner D. Neurobrucellosis in a hunter of feral swine. Infectious Diseases in Clinical Practice. 2014; 22(4):e103–e4. [https://doi.org/10.1097/IPC.0000000000000158](https://doi.org/10.1097/IPC.0000000000000158)
83. Mailles A, Ogielska M, Kemiche F, Garin-Bastuji B, Brieu N, Burnusus Z, et al. Brucella suis biovar 2
    infection in humans in France: emerging infection or better recognition? Epidemiology and Infection.
    2017; 145(13):2711–6. Epub 08/08. [https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268817001704](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268817001704) PMID: 28784192.
84. Godfroid J, Al Dahouk S, Pappas G, Roth F, Matope G, Muma J, et al. A “One Health” surveillance and
    control of brucellosis in developing countries: Moving away from improvisation. Comparative

* * *

Immunology, Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. 2013; 36(3):241–8. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cimid](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cimid).
2012.09.001 PMID: 23044181
81\. Ragan VE. The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) brucellosis eradication program in
the United States. Veterinary Microbiology. 2002; 90(1):11–8. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-1135(02)](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-1135(02))
00240-7.
82\. Nishi JS, Stephen C, Elkin BT. Implications of agricultural and wildlife policy on management and eradication of bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis in free-ranging wood bison of northern Canada. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences. 2002; 969:236–44. Epub 2002/10/17. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j](https://doi.org/10.1111/j).
1749-6632.2002.tb04385.x PMID: 12381598.
83\. Bell JC, Palmer SR. Control of zoonoses in Britain: past, present, and future. British medical journal
(Clinical research ed). 1983; 287(6392):591–3. Epub 1983/08/27. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.287](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.287).
6392.591 PMID: 6411240; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1549006.
84\. Franc KA, Krecek RC, Hasler BN, Arenas-Gamboa AM. Brucellosis remains a neglected disease in the
developing world: a call for interdisciplinary action. BMC public health. 2018; 18(1):125. Epub 2018/01/
13\. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-017-5016-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-017-5016-y) PMID: 29325516; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC5765637.
85\. Al Dahouk S, Tomaso H, No¨ ckler K, Neubauer H, Frangoulidis D. Laboratory-based diagnosis of brucellosis: a review of the literature. Part I: techniques for direct detection and identification of Brucella spp.
Clinical Laboratory. 2003; 49(9–10):487–505. PMID: 14572205
86\. Al Dahouk S, Tomaso H, Nockler K, Neubauer H, Frangoulidis D. Laboratory-based diagnosis of brucellosis: a review of the literature. Part II: serological tests for brucellosis. Clinical laboratory. 2003; 49(11–
12):577–89. Epub 2003/12/04. PMID: 14651329.
87\. Franco MP, Mulder M, Gilman RH, Smits HL. Human brucellosis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases.
2007; 7(12):775–86. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70286-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70286-4) PMID: 18045560
88\. Young EJ. An overview of human brucellosis. Clinical infectious diseases: an official publication of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. 1995; 21(2):283–9; quiz 90. Epub 1995/08/01. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.1093/clinids/21.2.283 PMID: 8562733.
89\. Vered O, Simon-Tuval T, Yagupsky P, Malul M, Cicurel A, Davidovitch N. The Price of a Neglected Zoonosis: Case-Control Study to Estimate Healthcare Utilization Costs of Human Brucellosis2015.
e0145086 p. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145086](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145086) PMID: 26669738
90\. Young JE, Corbel JM. Brucellosis: clinical and laboratory aspects1989.
91\. Dorneles EMS, Sriranganathan N, Lage AP. Recent advances in Brucella abortus vaccines. Veterinary
Research. 2015; 46(1):76. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s13567-015-0199-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13567-015-0199-7) PMID: 26155935
92\. Weinstein RA, Singh K. Laboratory-Acquired Infections. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2009; 49(1):142–
7\. [https://doi.org/10.1086/599104](https://doi.org/10.1086/599104) PMID: 19480580
93\. Yagupsky P, Baron EJ. Laboratory exposures to brucellae and implications for bioterrorism. Emerging
Infectious Diseases. 2005; 11(8):1180–5. Epub 2005/08/17. [https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1108.041197](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1108.041197)
PMID: 16102304; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3320509.
94\. Godfroid J, DeBolle X, Roop RM, O’Callaghan D, Tsolis RM, Baldwin C, et al. The quest for a true One
Health perspective of brucellosis. Revue scientifique et technique (International Office of Epizootics).
2014; 33(2):521–38. Epub 2015/02/25. [https://doi.org/10.20506/rst.33.2.2290](https://doi.org/10.20506/rst.33.2.2290) PMID: 25707181.