The Effect of Ongoing Exposure Dynamics in Dose
Response Relationships

1,2
Josep M. Pujol \*, Joseph E. Eisenberg1, Charles N. Haas3, James S. Koopman1

1 Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America, 2 Center for the Study of Complex Systems, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America, 3 Department of Civil, Architectural and Environmental Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America

Abstract

Characterizing infectivity as a function of pathogen dose is integral to microbial risk assessment. Dose-response
experiments usually administer doses to subjects at one time. Phenomenological models of the resulting data, such as the
exponential and the Beta-Poisson models, ignore dose timing and assume independent risks from each pathogen. Real
world exposure to pathogens, however, is a sequence of discrete events where concurrent or prior pathogen arrival affects
the capacity of immune effectors to engage and kill newly arriving pathogens. We model immune effector and pathogen
interactions during the period before infection becomes established in order to capture the dynamics generating dose
timing effects. Model analysis reveals an inverse relationship between the time over which exposures accumulate and the
risk of infection. Data from one time dose experiments will thus overestimate per pathogen infection risks of real world
exposures. For instance, fitting our model to one time dosing data reveals a risk of 0.66 from 313 Cryptosporidium parvum
pathogens. When the temporal exposure window is increased 100-fold using the same parameters fitted by our model to
the one time dose data, the risk of infection is reduced to 0.09. Confirmation of this risk prediction requires data from
experiments administering doses with different timings. Our model demonstrates that dose timing could markedly alter the
risks generated by airborne versus fomite transmitted pathogens.

Citation: Pujol JM, Eisenberg JE, Haas CN, Koopman JS (2009) The Effect of Ongoing Exposure Dynamics in Dose Response Relationships. PLoS Comput Biol 5(6):
e1000399. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399

Editor: Rustom Antia, Emory University, United States of America

Received July 7, 2008; Accepted May 4, 2009; Published June 5, 2009

Copyright: 2009 Pujol et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

Funding: This research was supported by U.S. EPA: Science to Achieve Results (STAR) Program and by U.S. Department of Homeland Security University
Programs (Grant # R83236201). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Introduction

Introduction
Microbial risk assessment models are valuable tools for
estimating the risks associated with exposures to pathogens in
the environment pathogens \[1\]. Central to this estimate is a doseresponse model that predicts the probability of infection given a
dose exposure magnitude. In current microbial risk assessment
models dose accumulates over time and the probability of infection
is based on the total accumulated dose over that period of time \[2–\
4\]. This assumes that each pathogen particle carries a risk of
infection that is independent of when other pathogens have
arrived to a host; i.e., three exposures to dose X generate the same
total risk as one exposure to a 36dose. We put forth an alternative
dose response model that assumes the current capacity of immune
effectors to control an arriving pathogen should be affected by 1)
how many effectors are occupied fighting previously or simultaneously arriving pathogens, 2) how many effectors have been
depleted in fighting previously arriving pathogens, and 3) how
many effector reinforcements have arrived due to usual effector
turnover rates or due to a stimulus from prior pathogen exposure.

inoculations. Models of influenza transmission that do not account
for dose-timing effects, such as the model by Atkinson and Wien
\[4\], might misdirect influenza control resources to masks from
hand hygiene. Models that assume independent single dose effects
will require more extreme cleaning to reduce risks to acceptable
levels than models capturing immune effects on dose timing.
Evaluating the potential importance of such dose-timing effects

levels than models capturing immune effects on dose timing.
Evaluating the potential importance of such dose-timing effects
is difficult for two reasons. First, immune control of pathogens is
complex; not enough detailed knowledge regarding that complexity is available to provide a high degree of confidence in a-priori
causal model predictions. Second, there is almost no direct
observational data documenting the presence or absence of dosetiming effects. Although various studies have given pathogen
exposure doses over time \[5–10\], only Brachman et al. \[11\], has
been conducted in a manner that allows one to calculate risks for
comparable doses administered over different temporal windows.

* * *

Author Summary

We model the relationship between the temporal patterns
of pathogen exposure and infection take off within people.
Since different routes of transmission (e.g., airborne versus
surface transfer routes) may result in different temporal
patterns of exposure, this model helps to better compare
the risks of transmission from one person to another
through these different routes. Previous models assumed
that the risk of infection is the same whether pathogens
are inoculated all at once or over one day. Our model, in
contrast, captures how one pathogen affects the potential
of immunity to keep concurrently or subsequently arriving
particles from initiating an infection. Since the pattern of
timing of airborne and surface spread pathogen arrivals
differ, our model shows that each airborne pathogen could
carry less risk than each surface transmitted pathogen.
Unfortunately, data to fully fit our model are not currently
available. Therefore new experiments will have to be
conducted where doses are given across different temporal windows.

ð 1Þ

ð 2Þ

We make our model general enough to capture dynamics of
pathogen control that might arise from established antibodies and
T-cells, macrophages, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, plasma
cells, dendritic cells, complement cascades, chemokines, interleukins, interferons, toll like receptors, and other diverse elements
affecting immunity. But we lump all these mediators of pathogen
control into a highly abstract entity we label as immune effectors.
We assume that the dynamic effects of limited immune effector
numbers are similar whether the limitation arises from immune
effectors being occupied with previously arrived pathogens or from
prior consumption of immune effectors in their process of killing
pathogens. Therefore we only model the latter source of immune
effector limitations. The resulting model is one where any single
pathogen always has some chance of initiating an infection but the
risk of infection associated with each additional pathogen exposure
can markedly increase at higher pathogen doses given over short
temporal windows. The exact dynamics of our model will vary as
realistic details are added to it. Our goal here is simply to illustrate
the importance and inevitability of immune mediated dose-timing
effects so as to stimulate further empirical and theoretical work.
The structure of the paper is as follows: in the methods section

ð 3Þ

Cumulative Dose Model
The model is based on a stochastic population of individual

Methods

The model is based on a stochastic population of individual
pathogens and immune effectors. Since the focus of our analysis is
how small populations of pathogens either die out or lead to
infection initiation, we cannot rely on the mean-field solution
provided by the deterministic framework \[12–14\].
The state of the system is defined by the pair (I, P) representing

The state of the system is defined by the pair (I, P) representing
the number of immune effectors and the number of pathogens, in
any single host, respectively. The system is defined by the following

(scriptstyle{I,}P\\scriptstyle)\\xrightarrow{\ ,,,,,,,,}\\{{{I}}}\ (I!!+!1,!P)

(I{,,}P)\\xrightarrow{I\\gamma\_{I}+P I\\delta\_{I}}(I{,}1!,)

set of state transitions:

P\\lambda\_{I}.

(I,,P)\\xrightarrow{\\quad P I\\delta\_{P}\\quad}(I,,P-1)

The number of immune effectors I can increase at: 1) a rate aI,
which models the constant arrival of immune effectors regardless of
the current state of the immunological system; and 2) a rate PlI,
which models the recruitment of immune effectors in the presence
of pathogens. This term is intended to reflect cytokine induced
recruitment of remote immune effectors to a pathogen invasion site
and not acquired immunity. We assume that the relative endpoints
of infection takeoff or pathogen elimination are reached before an
acquired immune effect comes into play. Immune effectors decrease
either at a natural death rate c , or at a mass-action deactivationI
rate due to the encounter with pathogens PI d .I
The number of pathogens P can increase by reproduction at a

P I\\delta\_{I}

I
The number of pathogens P can increase by reproduction at a
rate PhPor by arrival during the inoculation period at a rate aP.
Here hPrepresents the net reproduction rate that aggregates birth
and death rates. Pathogen numbers decrease due to interaction
with immune effectors as a mass-action deactivation process at the
rate PI dP.

\\gamma\_{I}:

P\\theta\_{P}

Dynamics of the Cumulative Dose Model
The initial state of the system is set to ðÞ I,P ~

\\theta\_{P}

Dynamics of the Cumulative Dose Model ~
aI
The initial state of the system is set to ðÞ I,Pt ~~0~~,0.No
cI
chronic low-level exposures or remaining pathogens from prior
exposures are considered. The system starts from the clean state:
no pathogens and the stationary number of immune effectors in
the absence of pathogens. The inoculation process is characterized
by the dose of exposure Deand the temporal exposure length Te;
i.e., the dose that is composed by Depathogens is inoculated into
the host during a period of Tetime units. Therefore, the arrival of
De
external pathogens is modeled as the rate aP~T during the
e
inoculation period. Once inoculation has finished the pathogen
arrival rate becomes zero. Thus, the rate aPdepends on time and
is defined as

P I\\delta\_{P}

D\_{e}

D\_{e}

Due to stochastic effects and the fate of a relatively small
population of pathogens and immune effectors, the same

T\_{e}

\ _{P}!=!{\\begin{array}{r l}{\\frac{D_{e}}{T\_{e}}}&{t\\leq T\_{e}}\ {0}&{t>T\_{e}}\\end{array} inoculation dose Deadministered in the same time frame Tedoes
not necessarily have the same outcome. Each replication (i.e. run)
of the model corresponds to a dose trial on a new subject. All the
4
numerical results are the average of 10 runs of the Cumulative
Dose model implemented with the Gillespie algorithm \[15\] using
C. The criteria to stop the simulation is either extinction of
pathogens after the inoculation period (P~0, twTe) or pathogens
4
diverging to a very large number, Pwmax 20,5\|De&I ~0,
corresponding to no infection and infection respectively. The
probability of infection for a pair fg De, Teis the proportion of
simulations that diverge to a large number as opposed to
equilibrating to the state of no pathogens.
Figure 1 illustrates the stochastic process effects on pathogen

D\_{e}

T\_{e}

10^{4}

(P!=!0,,t!>!T\_{e})

P\\text>m a!\\big(20^{4},5\\times\\dot{D\_{e}}\\big)&I=0

{D\_{e},,T\_{e}}

Figure 1 illustrates the stochastic process effects on pathogen
dynamics given a fixed time of exposure for different inoculation
doses. The main plot in this figure is the time course of the number
of pathogens for 100 independent dose trials given a dose of 60
pathogens administered over one unit of time. The number of
pathogens steadily grow during the inoculation period, from 0 to
De
1, since the rate of arrival of pathogens (aP ~~) is much faster
Te
than immunological killing of pathogens. Once the entire dose has
been inoculated at time = 1, the external arrival of pathogens stop
(aP~~ 0) and the immunological response dominates the rest of the

dynamics. In this particular case, the population of pathogens
becomes extinct in 33 cases out of 100, thus, the probability of
infection given a dose of 60 pathogens over 1 unit of time is 0.67.
Analogously, for a dose of 25 the probability of infection is 0.02
and for a dose of 90 the probability of infection is 0.98 (insets of
Figure 1).

(\\alpha\_{P}!=!\\frac\\ot{D\_{e}}}{T\_{e}}

\\mathrm{\ t i e e=1}

(T\_{e}{!\\rightarrow}0)

Temporal Exposure Length
Figure 1 illustrates how the

\ {\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \

Figure 1 illustrates how the Cumulative Dose model yields
higher probability of infection when the inoculated dose is
increased. The length of time over which the dose is administered,
Te, also plays a crucial role in the probability of infection. At one
extreme where all the pathogens were inoculated at once (Te?0),
the immune system has no time to react, and the initial state of the ~
aI
system is ðÞ I, P ~, De. From this initial state, the immunocI
logical response dynamics determines the fate of the pathogens:
either extinction or unbounded growth of pathogens diverging
towards infinity.
For T w0, however, the initial state after all pathogens have

T\_{e},

(\\alpha\_{P}!=!0)

For Tew0, however, the initial state after all pathogens have
~
aI
been inoculated (t~~T ) is not the expected ðÞeI, P ~, De,
cI
but rather a distribution of probabilities over the space of possible

(I,,P)!=!\\left(\\cfrac{\\alpha\_{I}}{\\gamma\_{I}},\ D\_{e}\\right)

\ _{T_{e}}!>!0,

Figure 1. Evolution of the number of pathogens over time for a characteristic parameter set fg fg hP, dP, aI, ªI, dI, lI~
fg f0:15, 0:01, 0:4, 0:01, 0:005, 0:05g. Each line represents an individual replicate with the same parameter set (100 in total). The fraction of replicates
in which the number of pathogens diverge towards infinity, as opposed to going extinct, is equivalent to the probability of infection (pinf) for the
dose De ~~60 (main graph, De~~ 25 and De~90 for the insets a) and b) respectively). Temporal exposure length is fixed at Te= 1 hour. Probability of
infection is 0.67, 0.02 and 0.98 for the main graph, the inset a), and the inset b) respectively.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g001

D\_{e}!=!25

{\\theta\_{\\mathrm{P}},\\delta\_{\\mathrm{P}},a\_{\\mathrm{I}},\\gamma\_{\\mathrm{I}},\\delta\_{\\mathrm{I}},\\lambda\_{\\mathrm{I}}}=

D\_{e}!=!90

D\_{e}!=!60

(p\_{i n f})

T\_{e}!=!1

* * *

Figure 2. State probability distribution at the end of inoculation (t ~~Te) for a dose of De~~ 60 and temporal exposure length of
Te ~~A) 0.1 h, B) 1.0 h, C) 10.0 h and D) 50.0 h. The distribution of probabilities if Te~~ 0 would be ðÞ I, P ~~ðÞ 40, 60 given the parameters of the
system are fg hP, dP, aI, cI, dI, lI~~ fg 0:15, 0:01, 0:4, 0:01, 0:005, 0:05 . The dashed white line is the separatrix of the deterministic version of the
model (see subsection Deterministic Analysis); if the system were deterministic once inoculation has been completed, the states that fall below the
separatrix would end up in no infection, and the states above would end up in infection.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g002

For Te ~~0:1 and Te~~ 1:0 the average state after inoculation is
very close to the ideal instantaneous inoculation, ðÞ I, P ~ðÞ 40, 60 .

\\scriptstyle\_{T\_{e}=A\\mathbf}

(I,,,P)!=!(40,,60)

T\_{e}!=!0.1

states. Figure 2 shows the stochastically determined distribution of
system states at the point in Figure 1 where the exposure time has
just ended. It illustrates the effect of different temporal exposure
lengths, ranging from Te ~~0:1 (six minutes) to Te= 50 hours.
Panel B shows this point of time for the settings in Figure 1. The
longer the exposure length, the larger will be the variance in the
distribution of probabilities. Furthermore, a longer exposure
length also affects the average state after inoculation. Both the
pathogen levels and the immune effector levels decrease from the
instantaneous inoculation values as the exposure window length
increases. But the balance between these increasingly favors the
immune effectors. Longer temporal exposure lengths dilute the
De
arrival rate of external pathogens, aP~~. Consequently the
Te
immunological response has more time to neutralize the existing
pathogens before the arrival of new pathogens. On the other hand,
as the temporal exposure lengths decrease, an increased number of
immune effectors are consumed in killing pathogens, leading to a
higher probability of unbounded growth of pathogens, and thus
infection.
For T ~0:1 and T ~1:0 the average state after inoculation is

(I,,,P)!=!(40,60)

T\_{e}!=!50

To better understand the dynamics once inoculation is over, we
included the numerically calculated separatrix as if the system
were deterministic (red-dashed line in Figure 2). Although this
separatrix is only truly valid for the analogous deterministic model,
it indicates the probable fate of different initial states. For the
deterministic system, the separatrix separates those states that go
to infection from those that do not (see subsection on Deterministic
Analysis). As temporal exposure length increases, the distribution
of probabilities gravitates towards the space of states that go to noinfection (below the separatrix).

* * *

The stochastic system is fully described by a multivariate master
equation \[16\], which can be expanded in a deterministic
formulation known as macroscopic law. The deterministic version
of the cumulative dose model is as follows,

\\frac{d I}{d t}!=!\\alpha\_{I}+P\\lambda\_{I}-I\\gamma\_{I}-P I\\delta\_{I}

ð5Þ

\\frac{d P}{d t}!=!P\\theta\_{P}!-!P I\\delta\_{P}

ð6Þ

where P and I are continuous variables of the population of
pathogens and immune effectors respectively. The fixed points of
the deterministic version of the cumulative dose model are
aI
s ~,0 where the pathogen has been eliminated and
cI
immune effectors are in equilibrium and
hPhPc {a dI I P
r ~, where the forces of pathogen growth
dPlIdP{hPdP
are balanced by immune dynamics affecting pathogen death. Note
that in the stochastic analyses of this model as in Figure 1, this
point is never reached. Instead simulations are terminated when
growth takes off toward this point. A simple analysis of the stability
of the fixed points reveals the space of parameters in which the
solution is well-defined.
The point s is the equilibrium of no infection—the equilibrium

s^{\*}!=!\\left{!frac{\\up\_{I}}{\\upgamma\_{I}},\ 0\\right\

r^{\*}!=!\\left{\\frac{\\theta\_{P}}{\\delta\_{P}},\\frac\\theta{}{\\rho\_{P}}\\gamma\_{I}!-!\\varkappa\_{I}\\delta\_{P}}{\\lambda\_{I}\\delta\_{P}!-!\\theta\_{P}\\delta\_{P}}\\right}

s^{\*}

To evaluate the stability of the fixed point, we formulate the
Jacobian matrix of the system of equations on s .

s^{\*}

s^{\*}

J!=!\\left(\\begin{array}{c c}{{-\\gamma\_{I}!-!P\\delta\_{I}}}&{{-I\\delta\_{I}!+!\\delta\_{I}}}\ {{-P\\delta\_{P}}}&{{\\theta\_{P}!-!I\\delta\_{P}}}\\end{array}\\right)

ð7Þ

For a stable equilibrium, both Eigenvalues of the Jacobian
matrix need to be negative, or equivalently, the matrix must have
a negative trace and a positive determinant. For the trace of the
hPaI
Jacobian to be negative the condition v zcImust be true.
dPcI
hPaI
Since the positive determinant condition, v, is more
dPcI
restrictive it subsumes the condition for a negative trace.
The second fixed point r is only well-defined when both I and

\\frac{\\lambda\_{i}}{\\delta\_{i}}<\\frac{\\theta\_{p}}{\\delta\_{p}}<\\frac{\\alpha\_{i}}{\\gamma\_{i}}

restrictive it subsumes the condition for a negative trace.
The second fixed point r is only well-defined when both I and
P are positive, since negative number of pathogens and immune
effectors are impossible. The number of pathogens is only positive
when signðÞ hPcI{aIdP~signðÞ lIdP{hPdI. Given the condition
hPaI
of a positive determinant, v, the sign can only be negative,
l h dPcI
I P
consequently v. Therefore, the system is well defined — i.e.
dIdP
has a stable equilibrium at no infection and with both fixed points
in the positive quadrant — only when the following condition 8 is
met

^{8}

ð8Þ

s^{\*}

\\cfrac{\\theta\_{P}}{\\delta\_{P}}\\textless\\frac{\\alpha\_{I}}{\\gamma\_{I}},

r^{\*}

s^{\*}

r^{\*}

~
hPcI{aIdP
follows: { ðÞ hPd {dI PlI. Given condition 8, both
lIdP{hPdI
terms are positive, which makes the determinant negative. As a
result the Eigenvalues of the Jacobian are real with different signs.
Therefore, r is a saddle point as shown in Figure 3.
The vector field in Figure 3 illustrates the dynamics of the

\\mathrm{f o l l o w s:},-\\biggl(\\frac{\\theta\_{P}\\gamma\_{I}-\\varkappa{\\it} _{I}\\delta_{P}}{\\lambda\_{I}\\delta\_{P}-\\theta\_{P}\\delta\_{I}}\\biggr)(\\theta\_{P}\\delta\_{I}-\\delta\_{P}\\lambda\_{I})

T\_{e}!=!50

\\c\_{P}\ \ \ frac{\\alpha\_{P}}{\\delta\_{P}}\\textless\\frac\\alpha{\_}I\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \

The vector field in Figure 3 illustrates the dynamics of the
cumulative dose after the inoculation period. The probability of
being in a given state after inoculation is shown in Figure 2. If the
system were deterministic then we could anticipate the probability
of infection by summing the probability of those states below the
separatrix. This does not hold for the stochastic Cumulative Dose
model. Nonetheless, the deterministic vector field, shown in
Figure 3, serves as an approximate description of what happens in
the stochastic model.
For instance, let us take the probability distribution of states when

the stochastic model.
For instance, let us take the probability distribution of states when
centered at ðÞ I, P ~~ðÞ 40, 60 , i.e., De~~ 60 and Te ~~1\. The typical
dynamic results in the decrease in number of pathogens and immune
effectors, gravitating towards the saddle point r , from which it will
bifurcate to the stable point of no-infection s ,oranunbounded
growth of pathogens. In the case of De~~ 60 and Te~50,mostofthe
states are already very low in pathogens, and consequently the
number of immune effectors will eradicate the few pathogens still
existing and go to the stable equilibrium of no infection. However,
there is a non-zero probability, albeit small, of being in a state with a
large number of pathogens and a small number of immune effectors.
In this case, stochastic perturbations aside, the pathogens will keep
multiplying producing infection in the host.

Analysis of Exposure Dose Risks
In this section, we fit empirical data on multiple pathogens for

(I,P)!=!(40,,60)

Results

In this section, we fit empirical data on multiple pathogens for
the single event inoculation scenario. Next, we extend our analysis
~ to incorporate different temporal exposure windows and patterns
of inoculation.
Fitting experimental dose-response data. We selected

Fitting experimental dose-response data. We selected
three different pathogen datasets: 1) poliovirus \[17\], 2)
Cryptosporidium parvum \[18\] and 3) rotavirus \[19\]. Analyses of
these three datasets are found elsewhere \[20\].
Several statistical models based on the empirical data have been

these three datasets are found elsewhere \[20\].
Several statistical models based on the empirical data have been
proposed to describe dose-response data. The most common
models are the Exponential model \[1\]:

P\_{i n!}!=!1!-!e^{-\\mu r}

where m is the inoculation dose and r is the per pathogen risk, and
the Beta-Poisson model \[21\]:

* * *

Figure 3. Vector field plot of the deterministic cumulative dose model for a characteristic parameter set fg fg hP, dP, aI, ªI, dI, lI~
fg fg 0:15, 0:01, 0:4, 0:01, 0:005, 0:05. To avoid overlaps of the vectors they have been normalized. The solid red lines are the nullclines, the
intersections of the nullclines are the fixed points s (stable pathogen elimination equilibrium) and r (unstable saddle point equilibrium). The dash
black line is the separatrix that separates those configurations that will go to non-infection equilibrium, s , and those that will diverge in the number
of pathogens resulting on infection. The separatrix has been calculated numerically.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g003

{\\theta\_{\\tt P},\\delta\_{\\tt P},a\_{\\tt I},\_{\\tt I},\\delta\_{\\tt I},\\lambda\_{\\tt I}}=

s^{\*}

s^{\*}

best fitting parameter values, we present the effect of different
temporal exposure windows on the final probability of
infection.

The cohort for rotavirus was 62 adult males, 18 to 45 years old.
The inoculation was oral. Unlike the previous dose-response
empirical datasets, neither the Cumulative Dose model nor the
Exponential model produce a good fit. The Beta-Poisson model
(BP) was statistically a better fit than the Exponential model \[20\].
Both the Exponential and the Cumulative Dose model increase

Finally, we tested the Cumulative Dose model against a dataset
for Rotavirus \[19\].
The cohort for rotavirus was 62 adult males, 18 to 45 years old.

Poliovirus
The first empirical dataset to which we apply the Cumulative

Poliovirus
The first empirical dataset to which we apply the Cumulative
Dose model is Poliovirus type 1 \[17\]. The cohort for this
experiment was 32 2-month-old infants. Inoculation was oral.
Figure 4 and Table 1 show the fit alongside a fit to the Exponential
model (EM) according to \[18\].

(B P)

models cannot maintain a non-zero or non-one probability of
infection for a dose range of several orders of magnitude.
Conversely, the Beta-Poisson model does not suffer from this
limitation since its convergence to 1 is slower, providing a wider
range of variance (Figure 6 and Table 3).
A possible explanation of the poor fit of the Cumulative Dose

A possible explanation of the poor fit of the Cumulative Dose
model is the high degree of acquired immunity to Rotavirus and
the changing serotype profile circulating within populations \[23\].
Unlike the polio virus study, the rotavirus cohort consisting of
adults (18–45 years old), is likely to have been exposed multiple
times to various rotavirus serotypes \[24\]. Such heterogeneity in
susceptibility flattens out dose response curves beyond what can be
captured by exponential dose response models or this Cumulative
Dose response model.

In the previous subsections we fixed temporal exposure length,
Te, to 1 hour, and assume that this is the time corresponding to
the single shot inoculation, analogous to existing experimental
dose-response trials. In this section, we present simulations for a
range of different temporal exposure lengths, illustrating how
longer times affect the dose response curve. The model is set to the
parameters that provided an optimal fit for a temporal exposure
length of Te~1:0.
Figure 7 shows the dose-response curves for Poliovirus type 1 for

The Effect of Temporal Exposure Length
In the previous subsections we fixed temporal exposure length,

T\_{e}.

\\mathrm{T\_{c}}{{=}}\ 11.0\ {\\theta\_{P},\ \\beta\_{P},,\\alpha\_{I},,\\gamma\_{I},,\\delta\_{I},\\lambda\_{I}}{{=}\ }{1.0151,1.0431,16.8190,0.7831,}

* * *

Figure 4. Dose-response curves based on the Exponential Model (EM) and the Cumulative Dose model (CD) compared to the
experimental dataset for Poliovirus type 1 (squares). The estimated parameters are ^rr ~~9:0\|10{3for the Exponential model \[3\] and
fg hP, dP, aI, cI, dI, lI~~ fg 1:0151, 1:0431, 16:8190, 0:7831, 1:7881, 1:4041 for the Cumulative Dose model.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g004

\\hat{r}!=!9.0\\times10^{-3}

{\\dot{\\theta\_{P}},\\dot{\\vartheta\_{P}},\\dot{} _{I},\\dot{\\gamma_{I}},\\dot{\\delta\_{I}},\\dot{\\lambda}\_{I}}!=!{1.015\]

infection decreases dramatically. Therefore, assuming that the unit of
time is one hour, and this is the equivalent for a dose that is
administered in a single shot, the probability of infection generated
by the Cumulative Dose model for a dose of Deof 90 pathogens
administered in one hour is 0.82. If the dose were administered not
in one hour, but uniformly over ten hours the probability of
infection would be 0.18. If the dose were administered over fifty
hours the probability of infection would be reduced to 0.0001. To
obtain the same probability of infection for a ten hours inoculation
period instead of one, we would require a dose of 139 pathogens
instead of 90.

D\_{e}

Because data on the impact of temporal patterns of inoculation
are currently not available, a model with dose-time dependence
such as ours is not identifiable \[25\]; i.e., the model can be fit to
existing single dose empirical data with many different parameters
sets. For example, in Figure 8 we show model simulation results for
Cryptosporidium parvum for two different parameter sets. Both
parameters sets have a similar fit to the Cryptosporidium parvum
dataset when Te~1:0 (mean square error using S and R is
23 23
3.5610 and 9.7610 respectively). For values of Tew1,
however, the dose response relationships of the two parameter sets
diverge. Parameter set S is much less sensitive to exposure time

T\_{e}!>!1

3.5\\times{00}^{-3},,\\mathrm{a n d},,9.7\\times{10}^{-3}

Table 1. Probability of infection from experimental data for Polivirus type 1 (Pinf) compared to the probability of infection based
on the Exponential model (EM) and the Cumulative Dose model (CD).

(P\_{i n f})

| Dose | No. of subjects | No. Infected | Fraction Infected $P\_{inf}$ | EM $P\_{inf}$ | CD $P\_{inf}$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 7.0 | 1 | 0 | 0.0 | 0.0617 | 0.0 |
| 16.0 | 2 | 0 | 0.0 | 0.1355 | 0.0 |
| 27.0 | 2 | 0 | 0.0 | 0.2178 | 0.0062 |
| 42.0 | 1 | 0 | 0.0 | 0.3176 | 0.0831 |
| 50.0 | 6 | 3 | 0.50 | 0.3656 | 0.1840 |
| 55.0 | 3 | 1 | 0.333 | 0.3938 | 0.2582 |
| 65.0 | 6 | 0 | 0.0 | 0.4465 | 0.4523 |
| 80.0 | 1 | 1 | 1.0 | 0.5171 | 0.6992 |
| 90.0 | 4 | 3 | 0.75 | 0.5591 | 0.8189 |
| 160.0 | 3 | 3 | 1.0 | 0.7668 | 0.999 |
| 210.0 | 2 | 2 | 1.0 | 0.8521 | 1.0 |
| 280.0 | 1 | 1 | 1.0 | 0.9218 | 1.0 |

\\hat{r}!=!9.0\\times10^{-3}

doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.t001

P\_{i n f}

Cumulative Dose model.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.t001

\ 7n77

C D\ P P\_{i n f}

* * *

Figure 5. Dose-response curves based on the Exponential Model (EM) and the Cumulative Dose model (CD) compared to the
experimental dataset for Cryptosporidium parvum (squares). The estimated parameters are ^rr ~~4:005\|10{3for the Exponential model \[30\]
and fg hP, dP, aI, cI, dI, lI~~ fg 2:1721, 1:7971, 2:8020, 0:9570, 2:2681, 2:7131 for the Cumulative Dose model.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g005

\\hat{r}!{=}!4.005!\\times!10^{-3}

{\\theta\_{P},\\delta\_{P},\\mathfrak{x} _{I},\\flat_{I},\\delta\_{I},\\lambda\_{I}}{!=!{2.\\dot{1}721,,}

than R due its slower dynamics. Using parameter set R, pathogens
proliferate faster, are being eliminated by each immune effector
more quickly, are recruiting fewer immune effectors, and are
eliminating immune effectors at a slower rate. On the other hand,
using parameter set R, the natural rate of turnover of immune
effectors is more rapid. We cannot argue at this point which is the
most plausible configuration since identifiability cannot be
resolved without data from dosing trials for different exposure
lengths.

The Effect of Dosing Patterns over the Exposure Window
In this section we relax the assumption that pathogens are

In this section we relax the assumption that pathogens are
inoculated at a fixed rate. We allow variation both in dose
magnitude and length of exposure time, in order to capture a more
realistic exposure scenario.

The temporal pattern of inoculation of pathogens within a host
depends both on the behavior of the host and the contamination of
the environment the host interacts with. For instance, a susceptible
host in a venue contaminated with influenza will be exposed to
pathogens from air and fomites. However, the temporal patterns of
exposure for these two modes of transmission are different. The host
is likely to receive a small dose with every breath when breathing
contaminated air. In fomite mediated transmission, however, the
touching of a mucous membrane with contaminated fingers, for
example, is likely to transmit a larger but less frequent dose.
To illustrate this effect we devised an experiment where both

To illustrate this effect we devised an experiment where both
the total inoculated dose Deand the exposure time length Teare
fixed. The only parameter that varies is the number of inoculation
events, Fi, which ranges from 1 to the total dose De. Consequently,
once the number of inoculations events is determined, the dose

D\_{e}

Table 2. Probability of infection from experimental data for Cryptosporidium parvum (Pinf) compared to the probability of
infection predicted by the Exponential model (EM) and the Cumulative Dose (CD) model.

| Dose | No. of subjects | No. Infected | Fraction Infected $P\_{inf}$ | EM $P\_{inf}$ | CD $P\_{inf}$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 34 | 5 | 1 | 0.2 | 0.1273 | 0.0848 |
| 108 | 8 | 3 | 0.375 | 0.3511 | 0.3173 |
| 313 | 3 | 2 | 0.6667 | 0.7145 | 0.7421 |
| 504 | 6 | 5 | 0.8333 | 0.8671 | 0.9065 |
| 1129 | 2 | 2 | 1.0 | 0.9891 | 0.9972 |
| 11460 | 3 | 3 | 1.0 | 1.0 | 1.0 |
| 113900 | 1 | 1 | 1.0 | 1.0 | 1.0 |
| 1139000 | 1 | 1 | 1.0 | 1.0 | 1.0 |

F\_{i},

\\hat{r}!=!4.005\\times10^{-3}

P\_{i n f}

E M;P\_{i n f}

doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.t002

* * *

Figure 6. Dose-response curves based on the Exponential Model (EM), the Beta-Poisson model (BP) and the Cumulative Dose
model (no CD) compared to the experimental dataset for Rotavirus (squares). The estimated parameters are ^rr~1:0\|10{1for the Exponential
model, ^aa, bb^ ~fg 0:253, 0:422 for the Beta-Poisson model \[31\] and fg h, d, a, c, d, l ~fg 7:499, 2:811, 11:621, 3:490, 2:823, 7:512 for the
P P I I I I
Cumulative Dose model.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g006

\\bigl{\\hat{\\alpha{}},\\hat{\\beta{{}}}\\bigr}=\\bigl{0.253,0.422\\bigr}

\\hat{r}!=!1.0\\times10^{-1}

\\frac{mathcal D{F\_{i}}}{\\mathcal{F}\_{i}}

Tei
Figure 9 shows the results of this experiment where the same
parameter sets are used as in Figure 8. The pathogen is
Cryptosporidium parvum, and the same two different parameters sets,
S and R, are used to inform the cumulative dose model. The total
dose inoculated is set to De~300 and the temporal exposure
length is set to Te= 120.0 hours.
For both parameter sets S and R we observe the same behavior:

\\frac{F\_{i}}{T\_{\\rho}}

D\_{e}!=!300

is more likely to produce infection than the patterns associated
with airborne transmission (high-frequency and low dose,
Figure 9.C) .
For parameter set R, the probability of infection if the dose is

length is set to Te= 120.0 hours.
For both parameter sets S and R we observe the same behavior:
infectivity decreases as the frequency or number of inoculations
events increases. The temporal pattern more likely to be associated
with fomite transmission (low frequency and high dose, Figure 9.B)

For parameter set R, the probability of infection if the dose is
inoculated with a single exposure (Figure 9.A) is 0.752. The same
dose inoculated over 4 events, where each event is one fourth of
the total dose (Figure 9.B), reduces the probability of infection to
0.443. In addition, if the dose is inoculated over 50 events
(Figure 9.C) the probability decreases to 0.111. For parameter set
S, the reduction of the infection probability is less pronounced:
0.740, 0.676 and 0.601 for 1, 4 and 50 inoculation events
respectively.

Table 3. Probability of infection from experimental data for Rotavirus (Pinf) compared to the the Exponential, Beta-Poisson and
Cumulative Dose models.

,\\left{\\hat{\\mathfrak{u}},\\hat{\\beta}\\right}{!==}\\left{0.253,0.422\\right}

| Dose | No. of subjects | No. Infected | Fraction Infected $P\_{inf}$ | EM $P\_{inf}$ | BP $P\_{inf}$ | CD $P\_{inf}$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| $9\\times 10^{-3}$ | 5 | 0 | 0.0 | 0.0009 | 0.0053 | <0.001(\*) |
| $9\\times 10^{-2}$ | 7 | 0 | 0.0 | 0.009 | 0.0477 | 0.0053 |
| $9\\times 10^{-1}$ | 7 | 1 | 0.1428 | 0.0861 | 0.2509 | 0.0740 |
| 9 | 11 | 8 | 0.7273 | 0.5934 | 0.5442 | 0.6175 |
| $9\\times 10^{1}$ | 7 | 6 | 0.8571 | 0.9999 | 0.7428 | 0.9999 |
| $9\\times 10^{2}$ | 8 | 7 | 0.875 | 1.0 | 0.8562 | 1.0 |
| $9\\times 10^{3}$ | 7 | 5 | 0.7143 | 1.0 | 0.9197 | 1.0 |
| $9\\times 10^{4}$ | 3 | 3 | 1.0 | 1.0 | 0.9551 | 1.0 |

\\hat{r}!=!1.0\\times10^{-1}

9!\\times!0^{3}

{\\theta\_{P},\\delta\_{P},\\bar{\\imath} _{I},\\bar{\\imath}_{I},\\delta{\ \ _{I}},\\bar{\\imath}_{I}}={7.499,2.811,11..

C D,P\_{i n f}

9\\times10^{-3}

9!\\times!0^{2}

9!\\times!10^{1}

B P\ P\_{i n f}

9!\\times!10^{-3}

9!{\\times}!10^{-\ }}

9\\times10^{-1}

10^{-3}

* * *

Figure 7. Predicted effects of varying exposure times (Te) when inoculated with Poliovirus type 1. Parameters are defined as stated in
Figure 4.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g007

(T\_{e})

Figure 8. Predicted effects of varying exposure times (Te) when
inoculated with Cryptosporidium parvum. The top graph comes
from simulations using the parameter set defined in Figure 5. The
bottom graph comes simulations using the parameter set
R~ hp, dp, ai, ci,di, li~fg 4:4901, 2:2761,7:4790, 1:2570,0:4241, 0:7871.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g008

In previous sections we showed that longer temporal exposure
lengths decrease infectivity due to the action of the immune
system. In this section, we show that not only the duration of the
exposure matters, but also the way in which pathogens arrive
within that interval can decrease infectivity. These results suggest
that risk assessments based on current dose-response data might be

(T\_{e})

R!=!\\left{!!\\theta\_{\\rho},\\hat{\\delta\_{\\rho}},\\hat{ _{\ }!{\_i}},\\hat{gamma{i}},\\hat_{\\delta\_{i}},\\hat\_{\\lambda\_{i}}\\right}=!{4.4901,2.2761,7.479\ {hat00}\\111.2570{\\hat{0}},0.4241,0.78},

over-estimating risk of infection. An important corollary is that risk
of infection for a given exposure dose may depend on the route of
transmission based on their differences in the pattern of exposure.

We examined a dynamic mechanistic model where immune
system effects generated dose response dependence on the timing
of doses. The specific aspects of our model that generate these
dose-timing effects are: 1) decreases in available immune effectors
because they are being eliminated as they kill pathogens; and 2)
increases in available immune effectors due to both pathogen
dependent and independent recruitment. An additional mechanism resulting in decreases in available immune effectors that is
not included in our model could be the time of immune effector
engagement with pathogens in the killing process. The dose-timing
effects we illustrate would be absent in a model where some
effector like a T-cell instantaneously kills pathogens or pathogen
generating cells, where no killing capacity is lost with each kill, and
where effector dynamics are not otherwise altered by encounters
with pathogens. Any such model, however, is highly unrealistic,
and therefore we conclude that the dose-timing effects presented in
our model could be important and warrant further study.
Dose-timing effects have implications for microbial risk

Discussion

Considering modeling infection transmission, the standard
approach is to define a contact and a transmission probability
~fg per contact while the physical route of transmission is ignored.
Modeling the physical route of transmission is important when it is

* * *

Figure 9. Predicted effects of different temporal patterns of exposure when inoculated with Cryptosporidium parvum. The main
figure displays the probability of infection as function of the number of inoculation events. The line with circular markers comes from simulation
results using the parameter set defined in Figure 5, and the line with square markers comes from simulation results using the parameter set
R ~~fg hP, dP, aI, cI, dI, lI~~ fg 4:4901, 2:2761, 7:490, 1:2570, 0:4241, 0:7871 The insets below demonstrate three temporal patterns for three
different patterns of inoculation events: A = 1, B = 4 and C = 50 events respectively. The solid line represents one instance of the 5000 replicas used in
the experiment. The dashed line represents the average of dose inoculated over time.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000399.g009

R!=!{\\theta\_{P},,\\delta\_{P},,\\alpha\_{I},,\\gamma\_{I},,\\delta\_{I},,\\lambda\_{I}}!=!{4.4901,,2.2761,,7.490,,1.2570,,0.4241,\ .0871}

such data is lacking.
The evolution of emerging infection implications derive from
the route of transmission effects just discussed. When pathogens
first jump species, they are likely to encounter strong innate
immune responses to which they must evolve some escape
strategy. That means very high transmission doses will be required
to sustain transmission and that low dose exposure over longer
times such as occurs with airborne transmission will be the most
unlikely to be effective in transmitting infection. But, as escape
from innate immune responses evolves, the balance could begin to
favor airborne transmission which might be more effective in
disseminating infection.
We do not have enough dose timing data for any infection to
evaluate either the microbial risk assessment implications, the

necessary to specify how much transmission is taking place in
particular public venues and when specifying which control
actions in these venues will reduce transmission. When different
routes have different temporal exposure patterns, we demonstrate
here that there is considerable potential for immune system effects
to alter the ratio by which airborne transmitted and hand-fomite
transmitted pathogens generate new infections. If we had data on
infection risks under different dose-timing patterns, we could say
more precisely how much difference in risk there might be from an
airborne and a hand-fomite mediated pathogen. Unfortunately
such data is lacking.
The evolution of emerging infection implications derive from
the route of transmission effects just discussed. When pathogens

We thank John Coffin, Igor Rouzine, and Patrick Nelson for their valuable
comments on early versions of this paper.

would at least indicate what range of effects might be expected.
Animal studies could compare the risks associated with a single
instantaneously delivered dose with the same dose magnitude
delivered over extended periods of time. Measurements of specific
immune effector dynamics, such as interferon gamma \[26\] would
improve our mechanistic understanding of a cumulative dose
effect and indicate how to refine our models for different animal/
pathogen systems.
The issue of dose-response trial design is crucial for advancing

Acknowledgments

The issue of dose-response trial design is crucial for advancing
both quantitative microbial risk assessment and analysis of
population infection transmission systems. Due to the absence of
a prior theoretical framework, there has been no motivation to
conduct dosing trials that take multiple doses and multiple dosing
times into account. Now that the potential effects of dose timing
have been demonstrated and the practical significance of such
measurements for microbial risk assessment and transmission
system analyses is more evident, we hope to see such experiments.
Acknowledgments

* * *

References

1. Haas CN, Rose JB, Gerba CP (1999) Quantitative Microbial Risk Assessment.
   New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN: 0-471-18397-0.

2. Noakes CJ, Beggs CB, Sleigh PA, Kerr KG (2006) Modelling the transmission of

3. Noakes CJ, Beggs CB, Sleigh PA, Kerr KG (2006) Modelling the transmission of
   airborne infection in enclosed spaces. Epidemiology and Infection 134(5):
   1082–91.

4. Eisenberg JNS, Lei X, Hubbard AH, Brookhart MA, Colford Jr JM (2005) The


1082–91.
3\. Eisenberg JNS, Lei X, Hubbard AH, Brookhart MA, Colford Jr JM (2005) The
role of disease transmission and conferred immunity in outbreaks: Analysis of the
1993 Cryptosporidium outbreak in Milwaukee. American Journal of Epidemiology. pp 62–72.
4\. Atkinson MP, Wein LM (2008) Quantifying the routes of transmission for

04. Atkinson MP, Wein LM (2008) Quantifying the routes of transmission for
    pandemic influenza. Bull Math Biol 70: 820–867.

05. Ellenberger D, et al. (2006) HIV-1 DNA/MVA vaccination reduces the per

06. McKane AJ, Newman TJ (2005) Predator-prey cycles from resonant
    amplification of demographic stochasticity. Physical Review Letters 94: 218.

07. Alonso D, McKane AJ, Pascual M (2006) Stochastic amplification in epidemics.
    J R Soc Interface; 10.1098/rsif.2006.0192.

08. Gillespie DT (1976) A general method for numerically simulating the stochastic
    time evolution of coupled chemical reactions. Journal of Computational Physics
    22: 403–434.

09. van Kampen NG (1992) Stochastic processes in physics and chemistry.
    Amsterdam: Elsevier.

10. Minor TE, Allen CI, Tsiatis AA, Nelson DB, d’Alesio DJ (1981) Human
    infective dose determinations for oral poliovirus type 1 vaccine in infants. Journal
    of Clinical Microbiology 13(2): 388–389.

11. DuPont HL, Chappell CL, Sterling CR, Okhuysen PC, Rose JB, Jakubowski W
    (1995) The infectivity of Cryptosporidium parvum in healthy workers. The New
    England Journal of Medicine 332(13): 855–859.

12. Ward RL, Bernstein DI, Young EC, Sherwood JR, Knowlton DR, Schiff GM
    (1986) Human Rotavirus studies in volunteers: determination of infectious dose
    and serological response to infection. Journal of Infectious Diseases 154(5):
    871–880.

13. Teunis PFM, van der Heijden OG, van der Giessen JWB, Havelaar AH (1996)
    The dose-response relation in human volunteers for gastro-intestinal pathogens.
    Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu Bilthoven 284550002.

14. Haas CN (1983) Estimation of risk due to low doses of microorganisms: a
    comparison of alternative methodologies. American Journal of Epidemiology
    118(4): 1097–1100.

15. Holland JH (1975) Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Ann Arbor:
    University of Michigan Press.

16. Koopman JS, Monto AS (1989) The Tecumseh Study XV: Rotavirus infection
    and pathogenicity. American Journal of Epidemiology 130(4): 750–759.

17. Koopman JS, Monto AS, Longini IM (1989) The Tecumseh Study XVI: Family
    and community sources of rotavirus infection. Am J Epidemiol 130(4): 760–768.

18. Armitage P, Spicer CC (1956) The detection of variation in host susceptibility in
    dilution counting experiments. Journal of Hygiene 54: 401–414.

19. Howat TJ, Barreca C, O’Hare P, Gog JR, Grenfell TB (2006) Modelling
    dynamics of the type I interferon response to in vitro viral infection. J R Soc
    Interface 3: 699–709.


pandemic influenza. Bull Math Biol 70: 820–867.
5\. Ellenberger D, et al. (2006) HIV-1 DNA/MVA vaccination reduces the per
exposure probability of infection during repeated mucosal SHIV challenges.
Virology 352: 216–225.
6\. Garcia-Lerma JG, et al. (2008) Prevention of rectal SHIV transmission in

6. Garcia-Lerma JG, et al. (2008) Prevention of rectal SHIV transmission in
   macaques by daily or intermittent prophylaxis with emtricitabine and tenofovir.
   PLoS Med 5: e28. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050028.
7. Tuckwell HC, Shipman PD, Perelson AS (2008) The probability of HIV

PLoS Med 5: e28. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050028.
7\. Tuckwell HC, Shipman PD, Perelson AS (2008) The probability of HIV
infection in a new host and its reduction with microbicides. Math Biosci 214:
81–86.
8\. Van Rompay KK, Kearney BP, Sexton JJ, Colon R, Lawson JR, Blackwood EJ,

8. Van Rompay KK, Kearney BP, Sexton JJ, Colon R, Lawson JR, Blackwood EJ,
   Lee WA, Bischofberger N, Marthas ML (2006) Evaluation of oral tenofovir
   disoproxil fumarate and topical tenofovir GS-7340 to protect infant macaques
   against repeated oral challenges with virulent simian immunodeficiency virus.
   J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 43: 6–14.

9. Van Rompay KK, et al. (2005) Attenuated poxvirus-based simian immunode-

10. Van Rompay KK, et al. (2005) Attenuated poxvirus-based simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) vaccines given in infancy partially protect infant and juvenile
   macaques against repeated oral challenge with virulent SIV. J Acquir Immune
   Defic Syndr 38: 124–134.

11. Wilson NA, et al. (2006) Vaccine-induced cellular immune responses reduce

12. Wilson NA, et al. (2006) Vaccine-induced cellular immune responses reduce
   plasma viral concentrations after repeated low-dose challenge with pathogenic
   simian immunodeficiency virus SIVmac239. J Virol 80: 5875–5885.

13. Brachman PS, Kaufman AF, Dalldorf FG (1966) Industrial inhalation Anthrax.

14. Brachman PS, Kaufman AF, Dalldorf FG (1966) Industrial inhalation Anthrax.
   Bacteriol Rev 30: 646–659.

15. Rand DA, Wilson HB (1991) Chaotic stochasticity: a ubiquitous source of

16. Rand DA, Wilson HB (1991) Chaotic stochasticity: a ubiquitous source of
   unpredictability in epidemics. Proc Royal Society B 246: 179–184.