RESEARCH ARTICLE

Cost-effectiveness of mask mandates on
subways to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission
in the United States

1,2,3
Joohyun ParkID1, Heesoo JooID1\*, Daniel KimID, Sundari Mase1,
Deborah Christensen1, Brian A. Maskery1

OPEN ACCESS

Funding: The author(s) received no specific
funding for this work.

Editor: Charli Sitinjak, Curtin University of Malaysia,
MALAYSIA

1 Division of Global Migration Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America, 2 Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, United States of
America, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology, H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America

Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.

Published: May 15, 2024

Accepted: March 30, 2024

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all
copyright, and may be freely reproduced,
distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or
otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose.
The work is made available under the Creative
Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

- [hjoo@cdc.gov](mailto:hjoo@cdc.gov)

Abstract

Community-based mask wearing has been shown to reduce the transmission of SARS-
CoV-2. However, few studies have conducted an economic evaluation of mask mandates,
specifically in public transportation settings. This study evaluated the cost-effectiveness of
implementing mask mandates for subway passengers in the United States by evaluating its
potential to reduce COVID-19 transmission during subway travel.

Materials and methods

Compared with mask recommendations only, mask mandates were cost-effective across all
periods, with costs per averted death less than a threshold of $11.4 million (ranging from
cost-saving to $3 million per averted death). Additionally, mask mandates were more costeffective during the early Omicron period than the other two periods and were cost saving in
January 2022. Our findings showed that mandates remained cost-effective when accounting for uncertainties in input parameters (e.g., even if mandates only resulted in
small increases in mask usage by subway ridership).

Conclusions

The findings highlight the economic value of mask mandates on subways, particularly during
high virus transmissibility periods, during the COVID-19 pandemic. This study may inform
stakeholders on mask mandate decisions during future outbreaks of novel viral respiratory
diseases.

Introduction

Following the emergence of COVID-19 in the United States in early 2020, federal, state, and
local authorities made efforts to mitigate the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in order to prevent
morbidity and mortality associated with this novel emerging pathogen. These measures
included the issuance of guidance and recommendations as well as various mandatory preventive measures, such as stay-at-home orders, gathering limits, and mandates for face masks \[1–\
3\]. One widely adopted preventive measure at both the state and federal levels was the implementation of mask mandates. In April 2020, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommended the use of face masks in public settings \[4\]. Subsequently, many
states and counties issued their own requirements for individuals to wear masks. In total, 38
states and the District of Columbia had implemented mandates with specifics of enforcement
for public mask wearing by the end of 2020 \[5\]. CDC issued an order requiring the wearing of
masks by individuals on public transportation conveyances traveling into, within, or out of the
United States, and at transportation hubs nationwide, which was in effect between February
2021 and April 2022 \[6,7\].
Several studies have investigated the effectiveness of public mask wearing in reducing the

2021 and April 2022 \[6,7\].
Several studies have investigated the effectiveness of public mask wearing in reducing the
transmission of COVID-19. Research conducted in various settings and countries has consistently demonstrated that widespread mask wearing in public can contribute to reducing the
spread of SARS-CoV-2, leading to a decrease in incident cases, hospitalizations, and deaths
\[8–13\]. However, despite several economic evaluations of nonpharmaceutical interventions
for COVID-19, only a limited number of studies included public mask wearing as a component of their research \[14,15\]. These studies have primarily examined broader community
contexts \[16\], college campuses \[17\], or other countries \[18–20\]. We found no studies that specifically investigated the cost-effectiveness of mask mandates in the context of public transportation conveyances. The CDC transportation-specific Mask Order included all conveyances,
including aircraft, buses, trains, and subways. We investigated the cost-effectiveness of mask
mandates in subways as a starting point. Subways, like all public transportation conveyances,
play a significant role in people’s daily lives, especially in large cities. Traveling on multi-person conveyances increases a person’s risk of being infected with and spreading COVID-19 by
bringing persons in close contact with others. This may occur for prolonged periods during
which they may not be able to distance themselves from individuals seated nearby \[6\].
Addressing this knowledge gap may help promote evidence-based decision-making in the
future to protect the public’s health.

We evaluated the cost-effectiveness of implementing a mask mandate by examining the
potential reduction of COVID-19 transmission during subway travel. By examining the potential benefits and costs, we aimed to provide insights into the value of implementing mask

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Cost-effectiveness of mask mandates on subways

mandates on subways during the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we examined how the cost-effectiveness of a mask mandate varied under different circumstances by considering changes in ridership patterns, SARS-CoV-2 infection prevalence, population immunity, mask usage, and in the predominant strain of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

## Materials and methods

We considered two scenarios in the United States: first, the “Mask mandate”, where mask- wearing by subway riders is required, and second, the “Mask recommendation”, where mask- wearing by subway riders is optional but recommended. We estimated the health impacts and costs of the two scenarios from a partial societal perspective and calculated the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER). We examined monthly estimates and explored the effects of mask-wearing over a time horizon of 11 non-continuous months corresponding to when dif- ferent strains of the SARS-CoV-2 virus were dominant: first, during the period with Alpha, Beta, and Gamma variants (November 2020 to February 2021); followed by the Delta variant (July to October 2021); and finally, the early Omicron subvariants (January to March 2022). To evaluate the health impacts of the intervention of mandated mask wearing in subways, we estimated the monthly numbers of COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths for each scenario. Initially, we estimated, by month, the probability of SARS-CoV-2 infection for pas- sengers in a subway car assuming the presence of one infectious person, using an airborne SARS-CoV-2 transmission model developed by Peng et al. \[21,22\]. This model combines a box model for estimating indoor viral aerosol concentration with the Wells-Riley infection model \[21\]. The authors provided an online spreadsheet model that can be applied to different settings. We adapted the model to simulate different periods during the COVID-19 pandemic, including variation in the dominant variant, population immunity, conveyance occupancies, and the fraction of people wearing masks in public without the mandate (i.e., recommendation only). We assumed that 95% of subway ridership would wear masks with a mandate across the periods and conducted extensive sensitivity analyses around this parameter. Our model input parameters are summarized in Table 1 and further detailed in S1 File in S1 Data. Due to lack of specific data for U.S. subway passengers, we applied the national average COVID-19 prevalence in the United States to the monthly numbers of subway passengers to estimate the number of infectious subway passengers by month. We estimated the number of SARS-CoV-2 infections in the United States by back-calculating the number of infections from reported deaths using estimates of the COVID-19 infection fatality ratio (IFR) that varied across different periods (Table 1 and S1 File in S1 Data) \[47–51\]. We assumed an average of three weeks between infection and death \[69–71\]. Further details are described in S1 File in S1 Data. Using the estimated probability of SARS-CoV-2 infection given exposure to an infectious individual in a subway car, we estimated the monthly numbers of SARS-CoV-2 infections for

U.S. subways under two scenarios, “Mask mandate” and “Mask recommendation”. The esti- mates of new infections were based on the monthly numbers of subway cars carrying an infec- tious person in the United States, passengers who rode on a subway car with an infectious person, and non-immune and potential exposed passengers. The fraction of population with immunity was based on previously reported studies \[37,38\]. The detailed estimation process is described in S2 File in S1 Data. We estimated the number of subway cars that would have an infectious person during each month by comparing the national average prevalence estimate to the average number of pas- sengers per subway car. To simplify the analysis, we assumed that if a subway car had an infec- tious person, it would have exactly one infectious individual. This assumption was relaxed in a
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199) May 15, 2024 3 / 20

* * *

Table 1. Parameter values and sources used to estimate cost-effectiveness of mask mandates on subways.

| Parameters | Unit | Baseline | LB | UB | Distribution | Source |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Parameters used for estimating COVID-19 infections, hospitalizations, and deathsa |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Subway car dimension |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Length | meter | 18.4 | 14.6 | 22.9 | beta-PERT | \[23-27\] |
| Width | meter | 2.8 | 2.6 | 3.1 | beta-PERT |  |
| Height | meter | 3.3 | 2.1 | 3.7 | beta-PERT |  |
| Duration of travel | min | 24.4 | 18.3 | 30.5 | beta-PERT | \[28\], assumption |
| Ventilation with outside air | per hour | 18 | 11 | 28 | beta-PERT | \[29-31\] |
| Number of passengers per subway carb | people | 22-59 | 17-55 | 28-74 | beta-PERT | \[32-36\], assumption |
| Fraction of population immune(%)c |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Nov 2020-Feb 2021 | % | 14.7 | 11.1 | 19.8 | beta-PERT | \[37\] |
| Jul-Oct 2021 | % | 51.0 | 47 | 56 | beta-PERT | \[38\] |
| Jan-Mar 2022 | % | 21.8 | 20.7 | 23.4 | beta-PERT | \[37\] |
| SARS-CoV-2 exhalation rate by an infectious person resting and breathing | quanta/hour | 18.6 | 8.4 | 48.1 | beta-PERT | \[21\] |
| Quanta enhancement due to variantsb |  |  |  |  |  | \[21,39-41\] |
| Nov 2020-Feb 2021 | - | 1.0 | 1.0 | 1.0 | Constant |  |
| Jul-Oct 2021 | - | 2.0 | 2.0 | 2.0 | Constant |  |
| Jan-Mar 2022 | - | 2.5 | 2.5 | 2.5 | Constant |  |
| Exhalation mask efficiencyd | % | 50 | 37.5 | 62.5 | beta-PERT | \[21,42,43),assumption |\
| Inhalation mask efficiencye | % | 30 | 22.5 | 37.5 | beta-PERT | \[21,42,43),assumption |\
| People wearing masks in subway |  |  |  |  |  |  |\
| with mask mandate | % | 95 | 90 | 100 | beta-PERT | Assumption |\
| without mask mandateb | % | 32-62 | 16-34 | 39-85 | beta-PERT | \[44-46\] |\
| Probability of COVID-19 infectionb,f | % | 0.1-1.9 | 0.1-1.5 | 0.1-2.6 | N/A(Calculated) | Calculated |\
| Hospitalization rate given infectionb,g | % | 1.7-6.1 | 0.4-4.5 | 0.6-7.6 | N/A(Calculated) | Calculated |\
| Infection fatality ratiob,h | % | 0.14-0.78 | 0.11-0.58 | 0.18-0.97 | beta-PERT | \[47-51),assumption |\
| Cost parameters |  |  |  |  |  |  |\
| Reusable face mask (per count)f | $ | 4.0 | 0.6 | 16.7 | Gamma | \[52\] |\
| Disposable face mask (per count) | $ | 0.3 | 0.1 | 2.0 | Gamma | \[52,53\] |\
| People wearing reusable masks | % | 34 | 17 | 58 | beta-PERT | \[54\] |\
| Communication/signagef | $ | 1,856,273 | - | - | N/A(Calculated) | \[55-58\] |\
| Fraction experiencing disutility from wearing masks | % | 14 | 10 | 17 | beta-PERT | \[59),assumption |\
| WTP to ride on a subway car without a mask mandate for individuals with disutility | $ | 1.5 | 0.5 | 27.5 | Gamma | \[59-61\] |\
| Cost of COVID-19 treatment |  |  |  |  |  |  |\
\
(Continued)\
\
* * *\
\
Table 1. (Continued)\
\
| Parameters | Unit | Baseline | LB | UB | Distribution | Source |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| Death | $ | 27,017 | 25,527 | 32,015 | Gamma | \[65,68\] |\
\
as\
We used the airborne COVID-19 transmission model developed by Peng et al. \[21\], which is accessible as an online spreadsheet model. Details of the model are\
described in previous studies \[21,22\].\
b\
\
b\
Some parameters changed over time, such as month or period. The parameters specified by month or period are described in S1 File in S1 Data.\
c\
Population immunity was estimated for each study period based on published estimates of the percentages of the U.S. population with effective protection against\
\
c\
Population immunity was estimated for each study period based on published estimates of the percentages of the U.S. population with effective protection against\
SARS-CoV-2 infection over time, considering vaccine- and infection-acquired immunity, as well as waning immunity.\
d\
Mask efficiencies in reducing virus emission from nose and mouth of an infectious person.\
\
d\
Mask efficiencies in reducing virus emission from nose and mouth of an infectious person.\
e\
\
e\
Mask efficiencies in reducing virus inhalation by a potentially exposed person for virus in aerosol particles floating in the air.\
f\
\
f\
The incidence of COVID-19 infections in the United States was estimated by back-calculating from reported deaths and period-specific infection fatality ratios\
assuming an average three-week lag between infection and death. Details of the estimation are described in S1 File in S1 Data.\
g\
\
g\
The hospitalization rate given infection was estimated by dividing the reported number of new hospital admissions by the estimated number of COVID-19 infections\
one week prior, assuming a lag of about one week between infection and hospitalization. Details of the estimation are described in S1 File in S1 Data.\
h\
Infection fatality ratios (IFR) were based on published literature. For the months where the IFR information was not available from the literature, we used linear\
\
h\
Infection fatality ratios (IFR) were based on published literature. For the months where the IFR information was not available from the literature, we used linear\
interpolation to estimate the monthly IFR. Details of the estimation are described in S1 File in S1 Data.\
i\
Reusable masks were assumed to be used for a month.\
\
i\
Reusable masks were assumed to be used for a month.\
j\
The cost of communication or signage was calculated by multiplying the price for printing posters by the total number of posters in subways; the range was determined\
\
j\
The cost of communication or signage was calculated by multiplying the price for printing posters by the total number of posters in subways; the range was determined\
by component price estimates. A total cost of $1,856,273 was applied to the first month of the analysis (November 2020). We then assumed that25% of this amount\
would be incurred for each subsequent month as maintenance costs. Details of the estimation are described in S3 File in S1 Data.\
LB, lower bound; UB, upper bound; PERT, program evaluation and review technique; min, minute; WTP, willingness-to-pay.\
\
sensitivity analysis. The estimated SARS-CoV-2 infections that would occur during subway\
travel were further subdivided into hospitalized cases, fatal cases, and non-hospitalized cases\
(outpatient visits only). The number of non-medically attended patients were quantified, but\
their costs were not considered, given the relatively lower costs of obtaining over-the-counter\
drugs to alleviate COVID-19 related symptoms and because some would be asymptomatic.\
The costs of implementing mask mandates on subways included face masks, communica-\
\
The costs of implementing mask mandates on subways included face masks, communication or signage in subway cars (e.g., posters or interior car cards), and passenger disutility\
from wearing masks (i.e., opportunity costs for those who would prefer not to wear masks).\
We estimated monthly incremental costs of reusable and disposable masks among U.S. subway\
passengers under a mask mandate scenario, using the National Transit Database (NTD)\
monthly heavy rail (i.e., subway) ridership data \[72\], U.S. market prices, and the proportions\
of individuals who would not wear a mask without the mandate but would wear a mask with\
the mandate \[52,53\]. The costs associated with communication or signage in subways were\
based on U.S. market prices or information available in published literature \[55–58\]. The\
opportunity cost was extrapolated from a previous survey study that examined respondents’\
willingness-to-pay (WTP) more for a flight ticket in which masking would be optional to a\
hypothetical alternative flight in which masking would be required \[59–61\]. Further details are\
provided in S3 File in S1 Data.\
We also estimated the costs of COVID-19 treatment in each scenario, “Mask mandate” and\
\
For the economic evaluation, we compared the health outcomes (including the number of\
COVID-19 infections, hospitalizations, and deaths) with the total costs (including the intervention costs and COVID-19 treatment costs) between the two scenarios (“Mask mandate” vs.\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S O N E** Cost-effectiveness of mask mandates on subways\
\
“Mask recommendation”). We calculated ICER estimates, expressed as the net cost per averted death. We adopted the central and lower bound values of statistical life (VSL, $11.4 million and $5.3 million in 2020, respectively) as the WTP thresholds for identifying cost-effective interven- tions \[74\]. Therefore, if the ICER was below $11.4 million, “Mask mandate” was considered cost-effective (or $5.3 million using the lower bound threshold). Alternatively, if there were net cost savings (i.e., negative incremental total costs and positive incremental health impacts), “Mask mandate” was considered as a dominant, or cost-saving. strategy. Our analysis was con- ducted from a limited societal perspective, considering non-medical costs of intervention and direct medical costs associated with treating COVID-19. We reported costs in 2020 U.S. dollars. We developed the model using Microsoft Excel and R software. The R software was used to conduct one-way deterministic sensitivity analysis based on the lower and upper bound esti- mates provided in S1 and S3 Files in S1 Data. In addition, we conducted multivariate probabi- listic sensitivity analyses to consider the combined effect of simultaneously varying input parameters in the model. We performed 5,000 iterations using @RISK software (version 7), an add-in tool for Microsoft Excel. We identified some key assumptions that could affect our model for additional sensitivity analyses. First, we varied our assumption that exactly one passenger would be infectious on each subway car, and assumed that exactly two, three, four, or more passengers were infectious on each car. Given the low prevalence of infectious individuals at any one time relative to the number of subway car occupants, we believe that the single infectious passenger example would be the most common scenario. We maintained the same number of total infectious individuals per month as in our baseline estimates by adjusting the number of subway cars with infectious individuals in this sensitivity analysis (e.g., if we assumed two infectious pas- sengers per subway car, the number of subway cars with an infectious passenger would be reduced by 50% to maintain a consistent number of total monthly infectious passengers corre- sponding to the national average prevalence rate). Furthermore, given the possibility of a decrease in mask-wearing over time even with a man- date, we conducted additional sensitivity analysis to address this possibility. Our base assump- tion was that 95% would wear masks (ranging from 90% to 100%). We explored a scenario where only half of those who would not choose to wear masks if recommended would comply with the mask mandate. The associated compliance rate estimates were 81% in the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma period (vs. 62% without a mandate), 64% in the Delta period (vs. 29%), and 66% in the early Omicron period (vs. 32%). For this analysis, we also assumed lower disutility costs (50% of the base case) since those most opposed to wearing masks would be less likely to com- ply. This approach adds context to potential ICERs of mask mandates if mask wearing rates are lower than expected and proportional to “Mask recommendation” rates. Further details are in S4 File in S1 Data. We also estimated the cost-effectiveness of a mask mandate scenario in com- parison to no intervention, assuming no one would wear masks without a mandate. Lastly, we considered estimates of IFR, deaths, and hospitalizations associated with COVID-19 specific to metropolitan areas (as opposed to the national estimates used in the main analysis). This approach allowed us to examine the potential limitation of using national average estimates of COVID-19 prevalence, hospitalizations, and deaths compared to using estimates tied to metropolitan areas, which may be more consistent with large cities with sub- way systems. Details of the estimation are described in S5 File in S1 Data.\
\
**Results**\
\
Table 2 presents the estimated health outcomes and costs associated with each scenario ("Mask\
\
mandate" and "Mask recommendation"), as well as the incremental health outcomes, costs,\
\
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199) May 15, 2024 6 / 20\
\
* * *\
\
Table 2. Estimated health outcomes and costs of mask mandates on subways.\
\
|  | Alpha,Beta,Gamma Period |  |  |  | Delta Period |  |  | Early Omicron Period |  |  |  |\
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\
| Nov 2020 | Dec 2020 | Jan 2021 | Feb 2021 | Jul 2021 | Aug 2021 | Sep 2021 | Oct 2021 | Jan 2022 | Feb 2022 | Mar 2022 |  |\
| Subway ridership(Thousand)\* | 94,958 | 96,182 | 92,004 | 86,177 | 153,468 | 149,195 | 160,808 | 184,490 | 136,336 | 156,069 | 186,855 |\
| Passengers who rode on a subway with an infectious person(Thousand)\* | 7,881 | 10,606 | 10,000 | 5,476 | 6,195 | 15,883 | 20,947 | 18,353 | 122,672 | 123,546 | 72,646 |\
| Non-immune passengers(Thousand)\* | 6,723 | 9,047 | 8,530 | 4,671 | 3,035 | 7,783 | 10,264 | 8,993 | 95,929 | 96,613 | 56,809 |\
| Unique passengers(Thousand)† | 1,187 | 1,202 | 1,150 | 1,077 | 1,918 | 1,865 | 2,010 | 2,306 | 1,704 | 1,951 | 2,336 |\
| Health outcomes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |\
| "Mask mandate" |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |\
| SARS-CoV-2 infections | 1,446 | 1,945 | 1,834 | 1,004 | 1,305 | 3,346 | 4,413 | 3,867 | 51,559 | 51,926 | 30,533 |\
| COVID-19 hospitalizations | 59 | 78 | 67 | 33 | 79 | 200 | 176 | 113 | 850 | 456 | 147 |\
| COVID-19 deaths | 11 | 15 | 14 | 8 | 9 | 24 | 31 | 27 | 148 | 78 | 43 |\
| "Mask recommendation" |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |\
| SARS-CoV-2 infections | 2,168 | 2,917 | 2,750 | 1,506 | 2,726 | 6,989 | 9,218 | 8,077 | 104,368 | 105,112 | 61,807 |\
| COVID-19 hospitalizations | 88 | 116 | 101 | 50 | 165 | 418 | 368 | 235 | 1,721 | 922 | 297 |\
| COVID-19 deaths | 17 | 22 | 21 | 11 | 20 | 50 | 65 | 57 | 300 | 158 | 87 |\
| Costs (Thousand USD) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |\
| Intervention cost |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |\
| Purchasing face masks,(a) | $2,839 | $2,876 | $2,751 | $2,577 | $9,191 | $8,935 | $9,631 | $11,049 | $7,748 | $8,869 | $10,619 |\
| Disutility of wearing masks,(b) | $10,025 | $10,154 | $9,713 | $9,098 | $16,202 | $15,751 | $16,977 | $19,477 | $14,393 | $16,476 | $19,726 |\
\
- The monthly subway ridership data was obtained from the National Transit Database (NTD). The number of passengers who rode on a subway with an infectious\
  person, as well as the number of non-immune passengers, were estimated using the estimated probabilities of COVID-19 infections in a subway car and the estimated\
  probability of being infectious in the United States. Further details and assumptions are described in S2 File in S1 Data.\
  † The number of unique passengers per month was estimated by dividing the NTD monthly ridership data by 80 (2×2×20), assuming that, on average, each passenger\
  had one transfer per trip, would complete one round trip each day, and used subways for 20 days per month (corresponding to working days). This assumption was\
  made due to the nature of the NTD ridership data, which counted passengers each time they boarded a vehicle, regardless of the number of vehicles used for their\
  journey from origin to destination (i.e., unlinked passenger trips). Further details are in S3 File in S1 Data.\
  ICER, incremental cost-effectiveness ratio; USD, U.S. dollar.\
\
* * *\
\
and ICERs of "Mask mandate" versus "Mask recommendation." All estimates were presented\
on a monthly basis for the three study periods: the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma period (November\
2020 to February 2021); the Delta period (July to October 2021); and the early Omicron period\
(January to March 2022).\
\
Health outcomes\
\
A monthly estimate of the number of subway passengers non-immune to SARS-CoV-2 infection and who shared a subway car with an infectious passenger (i.e., potentially exposed passengers) varied within and across the different periods and generally increased over time. It\
ranged from approximately 5 to 9 million passengers in the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma period, 3\
to 10 million passengers in the Delta period, and 57 to 97 million passengers during the early\
Omicron period (Table 2). As expected, the number of COVID-19 infections, hospitalizations,\
and deaths increased as the number of potentially exposed passengers increased.\
In addition, higher numbers of subway-associated infections, hospitalizations, and deaths\
\
and deaths increased as the number of potentially exposed passengers increased.\
In addition, higher numbers of subway-associated infections, hospitalizations, and deaths\
were estimated under the “Mask recommendation” scenario compared to the “Mask mandate”\
scenario. Under the “Mask mandate” scenario, the estimated monthly number of persons\
infected in subways during the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma period ranged from approximately\
1,004 to 1,945, which would result in between 33 and 78 passengers requiring hospitalization\
and between 8 and 15 deaths due to COVID-19. For the Delta period, the number of subwayassociated infections ranged from 1,305 to 4,413, hospitalizations ranged from 79 to 200, and\
deaths ranged from 9 to 31. Furthermore, during the early Omicron period, estimates ranged\
from 30,533 to 51,926 subway-associated infections, 147 to 850 hospitalizations, and 43 to 148\
deaths. Overall, “Mask mandate” was estimated to reduce the number of infections, hospitalizations, and deaths by about 33% during the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma period, by 52% during the\
Delta period, and by 51% during the early Omicron period. The month in which “Mask mandate” would result in the highest number of infections, hospitalizations, and deaths averted\
(52,809 infections, 871 hospitalizations, and 152 deaths) was January 2022 (early Omicron\
period). In contrast, the smallest numbers would have been averted in February 2021 (Alpha,\
Beta, and Gamma period, 502 infections, 17 hospitalizations, and 4 deaths). Table 2 presents\
estimates of averted infections, hospitalizations, and deaths for each month and period.\
\
During the three variant-specific periods, we estimated that total costs, including mask wearing and illness costs, of the “Mask mandate” scenario ranged between $14 million (February\
2021) and $74 million (January 2022) (Table 2). The costs of face masks and the disutility of\
\
During the three variant-specific periods, we estimated that total costs, including mask wearing and illness costs, of the “Mask mandate” scenario ranged between $14 million (February\
2021) and $74 million (January 2022) (Table 2). The costs of face masks and the disutility of\
\
2021. and $74 million (January 2022) (Table 2). The costs of face masks and the disutility of\
\
wearing masks exceeded the costs of COVID-19 treatment during the Alpha, Beta, Gamma to\
Delta periods; and these costs accounted for more than 75% of the total costs. During the early\
Omicron period, when prevalence rates were highest, the cost of COVID-19 treatment con-\
\
wearing masks exceeded the costs of COVID-19 treatment during the Alpha, Beta, Gamma to\
Delta periods; and these costs accounted for more than 75% of the total costs. During the early\
Omicron period, when prevalence rates were highest, the cost of COVID-19 treatment con-\
\
Omicron period, when prevalence rates were highest, the cost of COVID-19 treatment contributed more to the total cost estimates and accounted for 70% and 47% of the total costs in\
\
Relative to “Mask recommendation”, the ICER estimate for the mask mandate in subways varied from $1.6 million to $3.0 million per death averted during the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma\
\
* * *\
\
Number of deaths averted\
\
Fig 1. Cost-effectiveness plane by month for mask mandates on subways. The blue triangle represents the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma\
period, the green diamond represents the Delta period, and the orange circle represents the early Omicron period. The solid gray line\
represents the central value of the value per statistical life (VSL) at $11.4 million and the dotted gray line indicates the lower value of the\
VSL at $5.3 million.\
\
[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199.g001)\
\
period and from $0.6 to $2.2 million per death averted during the Delta period. For the early\
Omicron period, we estimated potential cost savings for January 2022 and ICERs of $30,783\
and $535,988 per death averted in February and March 2022, respectively. Each of these ICER\
estimates were less than our assumed WTP threshold ($11.4 million). Therefore, “Mask mandate” would be considered cost-effective compared to “Mask recommendation” throughout\
the study periods.\
\
Sensitivity analyses\
\
The one-way sensitivity results are summarized in tornado diagrams that show that the disutility from mask wearing (based on WTP estimates to switch from riding on a subway with mandatory mask wearing to a subway with optional mask wearing) had the greatest contribution\
to our ICER estimate uncertainty, regardless of the month (Fig 2 and S1 Fig in S1 Data). The\
next two most influential input parameters varied by period. In the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma\
period, the proportion of people wearing masks under “Mask recommendation” and the\
SARS-CoV-2 exhalation rate (i.e., the rate of viral load emitted to indoor air, quanta per hour)\
by an infectious person were the next most influential parameters. During the Delta period,\
the SARS-CoV-2 exhalation rate and the cost of disposable masks were the second and third\
most influential parameters. In January 2022, during the early Omicron period, outpatient\
treatment costs and the SARS-CoV-2 exhalation rate ranked as the second and third most\
influential parameters. In February and March 2022, the SARS-CoV-2 exhalation rate and the\
cost of disposable masks were identified as the second and third most influential parameters.\
The probabilistic sensitivity analysis (5,000 iterations) show that our results were robust\
\
The probabilistic sensitivity analysis (5,000 iterations) show that our results were robust\
across parameter uncertainty ranges. The cost-effectiveness acceptability curves for each\
period are shown in Fig 3 and the incremental cost-effectiveness scatter plots are presented in\
\
* * *\
\
Aug 2021\
\
Jan 2022\
\
When we changed the assumption of exactly one infectious passenger on subway cars with\
potentially exposed passengers to a greater number up to 20% of the base-case number of passengers (i.e., total number of passengers per car), the ICERs estimated for the mask mandate\
slightly increased, particularly during the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma period (S3 Fig in S1 Data).\
The highest increase was observed in February 2021, which increased from $3.0 million per\
\
[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199.g002)\
\
* * *\
\
Early Omicron period\
\
averted death with one infectious person per subway car to $3.6 million per averted death with\
four infectious persons per car. The increasing trends were less noticeable during the Delta\
and the early Omicron periods. In July 2021, the ICER estimate increased from $2.2 million\
per averted death with one infectious person per subway car to $2.8 million per averted death\
with seven infectious persons per car. Similarly, in March 2022, it rose from $0.5 million per\
averted death with one infectious person per subway car to $0.7 million per averted death with\
12 infectious persons per car.\
When we used lower proportions of people wearing masks for “Mask mandate”, which\
\
When we used lower proportions of people wearing masks for “Mask mandate”, which\
were proportional to the rates assumed for passengers who wear masks under “Mask recommendation” during the three periods (81%, 64%, and 66%, respectively), the estimated ICERs\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S O N E** Cost-effectiveness of mask mandates on subways\
\
remained lower than the HHS-recommended WTP threshold, with cost savings observed in January and February in 2022 (S1 Table in S1 Data). Further, even with coverage rates only slightly above what was assumed for the “Mask recommendation” scenario, the”Mask man- date” scenario remained cost effective (S4 Fig in S1 Data). In addition, when assuming that zero people would wear masks without a mandate, the mask mandate scenario was found to be more cost-effective than scenarios where some individuals would wear masks even without a mandate (S2 Table in S1 Data). The results using the metropolitan-specific estimates of COVID-19 infections, hospitaliza- tions, and deaths were consistent with the main analysis results and resulted in similar ICER estimates (S3 Table in S1 Data).\
\
**Discussion**\
\
We estimated potential costs and health outcomes of implementing mask mandates for sub- way passengers to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission during three different periods, account- ing for variation in prevalence, population-based immunity, conveyance occupancies, and mask-wearing compliance over time. Compared with “Mask recommendation”, “Mask man- date” was cost-effective, with an estimated ICER ranging from cost-saving to $3 million per averted death, across all periods. These ICER estimates compare favorably to the HHS–recom- mended WTP threshold ($11.4 million). In addition, the “Mask mandate” scenario was most cost-effective in the early Omicron period, with cost-savings observed in January 2022, fol- lowed by the Delta period and the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma period. The “Mask mandate” sce- nario continued to be cost-effective even with modest increases in mask usage with the mandate relative to “Mask recommendation”. The findings indicate that the “Mask mandate” scenario was most cost-effective during the early Omicron period, which had lower ICER estimates compared to the other two periods. This can be attributed to a higher number of averted COVID-19 deaths and greater cost sav- ings on COVID-19 treatment under the mask mandate during the early Omicron period (22 times and 35 times higher, respectively, in January 2022 than in 2021). There has been evi- dence that the Omicron variant is associated with a higher transmission rate but lower disease severity, including a reduced likelihood of hospitalizations, decreased need for intense respira- tory support, shorter hospital stays, and lower risk of death \[75–78\]. The early Omicron period was also representative of higher ridership and relatively low coverage of mask wearing with- out a mandate. In addition, the fraction of passengers assumed to be immune dropped consid- erably relative to the previous Delta period, possibly due to the more transmissible or immune-evading Omicron variant and waning of immunity \[37,38\]. To demonstrate the potential impact of the mandatory use of masks for subway passengers (i.e., the expectation that all passengers should follow the rule), this study assumed that the majority of subway passengers (95%) would comply with the mandate. We do not have com- plete data on compliance with mask mandates and compliance rates remain uncertain. The willingness to continue to wear masks, even with a mandate, may decrease over time or during periods with low disease prevalence. The only data we found indicated relatively high rates of mask compliance in New York City subways even late in the outbreak; the authors reported compliance rates of 95% in January 2022 and a weighted average of 90% for the three-month period from January through March 2022 \[79\]. These periods coincide with a state-level mask mandate in public areas (effective between April 2020 and September 2022) \[80,81\], as well as the transportation-specific federal mask mandate (effective between February 2021 and April\
\
2022. \[6,7\]. We also analyzed the impact of lower compliance rates. This is important because jurisdictions may have limited resources to enforce a mask mandate on subways. We found\
      PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199) May 15, 2024 12 / 20\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S O N E** Cost-effectiveness of mask mandates on subways\
\
that mask mandates would remain cost-effective even with small increases in compliance rates relative to mask recommendations. Because many individuals with SARS-CoV-2 infections may not seek treatment, we esti- mated the incidence of new infections and hospitalization rates rather than relying on reported estimates. Our estimates are in line with literature estimates for the Delta and Omicron periods in that the estimated fraction of population infectious with COVID-19 was significantly higher while the hospitalization rate was lower in the early Omicron period (e.g., 1.9% of the U.S. population was infectious with a 1.7% hospitalization rate for infected individuals in January 2022 compared to 0.3% and 6.0% in August 2021 during the period in which Delta was the predominant variant; S1 File in S1 Data). Because of the larger number of SARS-CoV-2 infec- tions during the early Omicron period, a mask mandate would avert more COVID-19 infec- tions, hospitalizations, and deaths, as well as the concomitant costs of COVID-19 treatment despite the lower hospitalization rates and infection fatality ratios for this variant. To estimate the number of SARS-CoV-2 infections, we adapted the Peng et al. model to estimate the probability of new infections during subway trips in the United States. The Peng et al. model focused solely on the shared-room airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2, which occurs through aerosols carrying SARS-CoV-2 originating from the nose and mouth of an infectious individual \[21,22\]. As SARS-CoV-2 can also be transmitted through close contact (e.g., less than 6 feet) or indirectly through contact with contaminated surfaces (e.g., skin-to- skin contact, or fomites via contact with handrails or seat rests) \[82,83\], our estimates of SARS-CoV-2 infections may underestimate the extent of infections resulting from these trans- mission routes. However, transmission through the air encompasses the primary exposures to the virus, including the inhalation of air carrying respiratory droplets and aerosol particles, as well as the deposition of viral particles \[34\]. Therefore, we believe that our estimates would account for the majority of potential COVID-19 cases in the subway scenario. Our findings align with previous studies conducted in different contexts, settings, and countries, providing further evidence supporting the use of face masks in public settings to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission from a cost-effectiveness perspective \[16–20\]. Notably, two computational modeling studies conducted in the United States have contributed valuable insights. One focused on community-level transmission across the entire U.S. population, con- sidering varying levels of vaccination coverage \[16\]. The other examined the cost-effectiveness of various prevention strategies, including mandatory mask wearing on a college campus \[17\]. Both studies presented strong evidence supporting the cost-effectiveness of mask mandates. For example, they indicated that maintaining face mask use was cost-effective or cost-saving, even after achieving the target vaccination coverage of 70–90% for the entire population \[16\]. Our study contributes additional evidence by focusing on the public transportation setting, specifically subways. Considering the crucial role of public transportation in people’s daily lives and its potential as a pathway for SARS-CoV-2 transmission, particularly in densely pop- ulated major U.S. cities, this analysis may be used to inform policy decisions during future out- breaks and pandemics. One unique aspect of this analysis is the comparator to the mask mandate, which used available data on the fraction of the population who would wear masks in the absence of a requirement for the “Mask recommendation” alternative. In comparison, other studies used a comparator with zero mask wearing, which may not be representative of the decision facing policy makers. A mask recommendation without the mandate would be sufficient to ensure some fraction of the population would wear masks and avoid the disutility costs for individuals who strongly oppose wearing masks. Our findings underscore the signifi- cance of face mask usage as a cost-effective strategy to mitigate SARS-CoV-2 transmission on subways, especially in densely populated areas.\
\
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199) May 15, 2024 13 / 20\
\
* * *\
\
**P L O S O N E** Cost-effectiveness of mask mandates on subways\
\
This study was subject to several limitations. The study results relied heavily on estimated parameters from multiple sources in the literature or required assumptions by the authors. We used a conservative approach in estimating the base-case value of the parameters. For example, as shown in the one-way sensitivity analysis results, the cost-effectiveness of the mask mandate (i.e., the ICER estimates) is sensitive to the estimated WTP amount for the fraction of the pop- ulation opposed to wearing face masks and to the proportion of people who would wear masks without the mandate, particularly during the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma period. Given the parameter uncertainties, we considered wide ranges to assess the robustness of the study results and conducted probabilistic sensitivity analyses, which showed that the “Mask man- date” scenario is cost-effective in more than 90% of iterations compared to the HHS–recom- mended WTP threshold. Furthermore, the results of our extended sensitivity analyses showed that the “Mask mandate” scenario remained cost-effective after adjusting assumptions such as the number of infectious people in a subway car and greatly reducing the proportion of passen- gers wearing masks under a mask mandate. Another limitation was that we did not account for the potential disutility associated with experiencing COVID-19 illness, including physical discomfort, pain, or health consequences after the infection (e.g., post-exertional malaise or cognitive impairment) that could impact individuals’ wellness and quality of life \[84\]. Furthermore, we did not incorporate non-medical costs, including patient time seeking medical care, transportation expenses, unpaid caregiver time, or potential productivity loss due to illness or caregiving responsibilities \[85\]. These omissions underestimate the economic and societal benefits of implementing a mask mandate, implying that our ICER estimates are conservative. While we accounted for the disutility associated with wearing masks, we did not fully con- sider the potential utility or positive impact of wearing masks for individuals who would prefer to ride on conveyances in which more people are wearing masks. Such benefits were previ- ously estimated based on WTP to fly in an aircraft in which masking was required. The frac- tion of the surveyed population willing to pay extra to fly on an aircraft with a mandate was more than twice the fraction who reported that they would pay extra to fly on an aircraft where masking was not required \[59\]. Thus, the disutility to the population opposed to mask wearing may be offset by the utility to the population who would prefer to travel with a man- date in place. However, we did not account for these benefits in this analysis to be conservative. Lastly, the findings should be interpreted with caution due to the focus on estimating the potential risks of SARS-CoV-2 infection during subway travel. Due to a lack of specific SARS- CoV-2 infection prevalence or health outcomes data for this population, we assumed that more generalized data for the U.S. population would apply to the subway passenger popula- tion. However, there may be differences in age, population immunity, or other important char- acteristics unique to subway passengers. Further, at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, when the infection rate was low, the subway “Mask mandate” scenario might have been less cost-effective compared to periods with higher prevalence rates when considering subway transmission apart from other factors. However, additional precautions could still help prevent community spread; thus, even a marginally smaller number of infections during subway travel could contribute to preventing wider spread within the community. Conversely, during peri- ods of high infection (e.g., the early Omicron period evaluated in this analysis), the subway mask mandate could delay, rather than prevent, infections due to ongoing community expo- sures. Additionally, mask wearing could also help prevent other viral respiratory diseases including influenza \[86\], such that the benefit of mask wearing might be underestimated in this study.\
\
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0302199) May 15, 2024 14 / 20\
\
* * *\
\
While this study provides valuable insights into the potential impact on SARS-CoV-2 transmission during subway travel, individuals may also be exposed to the virus in other settings\
associated with subway usage, such as subway platforms, transport hubs for transferring to\
buses or trains, or other public transportation conveyances when passengers make transfers.\
These additional points of exposure before or after subway travel could potentially contribute\
to a higher risk of infection than our estimates. In this regard, this study may have underestimated the extent of the overall risk associated with subway-related SARS-CoV-2 transmission.\
Further research might be needed to comprehensively assess the complete spectrum of SARS-\
CoV-2 transmission risks in various public transportation scenarios.\
\
Conclusions\
\
This study aims to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of implementing mask mandates on subways\
during the COVID-19 pandemic. We explored how ICERs varied across different circumstances, including periods when different variants were predominant. Our findings demonstrate substantial value in implementing mask mandates on subways during the COVID-19\
pandemic, particularly when the transmissibility of the virus was high, as seen with the emergence of the Omicron variant. By examining both the potential benefits and costs of implementing mask mandates in subways, this research may help stakeholders make informed\
decisions regarding the implementation of mask mandates during future outbreaks or pandemics of viral respiratory diseases. Furthermore, it may provide valuable insights for future\
decision making. Future studies may be warranted to explore the cost-effectiveness of mask\
mandates in different public transportation settings, such as buses, trains, or airplanes. Additional studies could also assess economic impact, feasibility, enforcement costs, potential\
healthcare savings, societal factors affecting compliance or adaptability, and long-term benefits. This may provide a comprehensive understanding of implementing mask mandates to\
prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission during travel on public transportation conveyances.\
\
Supporting information\
\
S1 Data. S1-S5 Files, S1-S4 Fig, S1-S3 Tables.\
(DOCX)\
\
Formal analysis: Joohyun Park.\
\
Methodology: Joohyun Park, Heesoo Joo, Daniel Kim, Brian A. Maskery.\
\
Data curation: Joohyun Park, Heesoo Joo, Daniel Kim.\
\
Supervision: Heesoo Joo, Sundari Mase, Deborah Christensen, Brian A. Maskery.\
\
Visualization: Joohyun Park, Heesoo Joo.\
\
Writing – original draft: Joohyun Park.\
\
* * *\
\
References\
\
01. Joo H, Howard-Williams M, McCord RF, Sunshine G, Fuller JA, Maskery BA. Trends in Percentages of\
    the US Population Covered by State-Issued COVID-19 Nonpharmaceutical Interventions, March 1,\
    2020-August 15, 2021. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2022; 28(5):491–5. [https://doi.org/10.1097/PHH](https://doi.org/10.1097/PHH).\
    0000000000001564 PMID: 35834786\
02. Moreland A, Herlihy C, Tynan MA, Sunshine G, McCord RF, Hilton C, et al. Timing of State and Territorial COVID-19 Stay-at-Home Orders and Changes in Population Movement—United States, March 1-\
    May 31, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020; 69(35):1198–203. Epub [https://doi.org/10.15585/](https://doi.org/10.15585/)\
    mmwr.mm6935a2 PMID: 32881851.\
03. List of Coronavirus-Related Restrictions in Every State: AARP; \[updated June 13, 2023June 21, 2023\].\
    Available from: [https://www.aarp.org/politics-society/government-elections/info-2020/coronavirusstate-restrictions.html#Alabama](https://www.aarp.org/politics-society/government-elections/info-2020/coronavirusstate-restrictions.html#Alabama).\
04. Lyu W, Wehby GL. Community Use Of Face Masks And COVID-19: Evidence From A Natural Experiment Of State Mandates In The US. Health Aff (Millwood). 2020; 39(8):1419–25. Epub [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)\
    10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00818 PMID: 20200616.\
05. Dunphy C, Miller GF, Sunshine G, McCord R, Howard-Williams M, Proia K, et al. The Differential Impact\
    of Reopening States With and Without COVID-19 Face Mask Mandates on County-Level Consumer\
    Spending. Public Health Rep. 2022; 137(5):1000–6. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1177/00333549221103816](https://doi.org/10.1177/00333549221103816)\
    PMID: 35792601.\
06. Federal Register: Requirement for Persons To Wear Masks While on Conveyances and at Transportation Hubs \[updated February 3, 2021October 5, 2022\]. Available from: [https://www.federalregister.gov/](https://www.federalregister.gov/)\
    documents/2021/02/03/2021-02340/requirement-for-persons-to-wear-masks-while-on-conveyancesand-at-transportation-hubs.\
07. Laris M, George J. TSA stops mask enforcement after federal judge voids mandate: The Washington\
    Post; 2022 \[updated April 18; cited 2023 November 13\]. Available from: [https://www.washingtonpost](https://www.washingtonpost/).\
    com/transportation/2022/04/18/mask-mandate-transportation-airplanes/.\
08. Peters JA, Farhadloo M. The Effects of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions on COVID-19 Cases, Hospitalizations, and Mortality: A Systematic Literature Review and Meta-Analysis. AJPM Focus.\
    2023:100125. Epub 20230614. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.focus.2023.100125](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.focus.2023.100125) PMID: 37362389\
09. Howard J, Huang A, Li Z, Tufekci Z, Zdimal V, van der Westhuizen HM, et al. An evidence review of\
    face masks against COVID-19. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021; 118(4). [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas).\
    2014564118 PMID: 33431650\
10. Coclite D, Napoletano A, Gianola S, Del Monaco A, D’Angelo D, Fauci A, et al. Face Mask Use in the\
    Community for Reducing the Spread of COVID-19: A Systematic Review. Front Med (Lausanne). 2020;\
    7:594269. Epub 20210112. [https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2020.594269](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2020.594269) PMID: 33511141\
11. Wong AK, Balzer LB. State-Level Masking Mandates and COVID-19 Outcomes in the United States: A\
    Demonstration of the Causal Roadmap. Epidemiology. 2022; 33(2):228–36. [https://doi.org/10.1097/](https://doi.org/10.1097/)\
    EDE.0000000000001453 PMID: 34907975\
12. Joo H, Miller GF, Sunshine G, Gakh M, Pike J, Havers FP, et al. Decline in COVID-19 Hospitalization\
    Growth Rates Associated with Statewide Mask Mandates—10 States, March-October 2020. MMWR\
    Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021; 70(6):212–6. Epub 20210212. [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr).\
    mm7006e2 PMID: 33571176\
13. Ford N, Holmer HK, Chou R, Villeneuve PJ, Baller A, Van Kerkhove M, et al. Mask use in community\
    settings in the context of COVID-19: A systematic review of ecological data. EClinicalMedicine. 2021;\
    38:101024. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2021.101024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2021.101024) PMID: 34308320.\
14. Zhou L, Yan W, Li S, Yang H, Zhang X, Lu W, et al. Cost-effectiveness of interventions for the prevention and control of COVID-19: Systematic review of 85 modelling studies. J Glob Health. 2022;\
    12:05022. Epub [https://doi.org/10.7189/jogh.12.05022](https://doi.org/10.7189/jogh.12.05022) PMID: 35712857.\
15. Izadi R, Hatam N, Baberi F, Yousefzadeh S, Jafari A. Economic evaluation of strategies against coronavirus: a systematic review. Health Econ Rev. 2023; 13(1):18. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1186/s13561-023-](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13561-023-)\
    00430-1 PMID: 36933043.\
16. Bartsch SM, O’Shea KJ, Chin KL, Strych U, Ferguson MC, Bottazzi ME, et al. Maintaining face mask\
    use before and after achieving different COVID-19 vaccination coverage levels: a modelling study. Lancet Public Health. 2022; 7(4):e356–e65. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(22)00040-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(22)00040-8) PMID:\
18. Losina E, Leifer V, Millham L, Panella C, Hyle EP, Mohareb AM, et al. College Campuses and COVID-\
    19 Mitigation: Clinical and Economic Value. Ann Intern Med. 2021; 174(4):472–83. Epub [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)\
    10.7326/M20-6558 PMID: 33347322.\
\
References\
\
* * *\
\
18. Deng Y, Zhao Y. Mathematical modeling for COVID-19 with focus on intervention strategies and costeffectiveness analysis. Nonlinear Dyn. 2022; 110(4):3893–919. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1007/s11071-](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11071-)\
    022-07777-w PMID: 36060281.\
19. Ferguson EA, Brum E, Chowdhury A, Chowdhury S, Kundegorski M, Mahmud AS, et al. Modelling how\
    face masks and symptoms-based quarantine synergistically and cost-effectively reduce SARS-CoV-2\
    transmission in Bangladesh. Epidemics. 2022; 40:100592. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2022).\
    100592 PMID: 35738153.\
20. Bagepally BS, Haridoss M, Natarajan M, Jeyashree K, Ponnaiah M. Cost-effectiveness of surgical\
    mask, N-95 respirator, hand-hygiene and surgical mask with hand hygiene in the prevention of COVID-\
    19: Cost effectiveness analysis from Indian context. Clin Epidemiol Glob Health. 2021; 10:100702.\
    Epub [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cegh.2021.100702](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cegh.2021.100702) PMID: 33558852.\
21. Peng Z, Rojas ALP, Kropff E, Bahnfleth W, Buonanno G, Dancer SJ, et al. Practical Indicators for Risk\
    of Airborne Transmission in Shared Indoor Environments and Their Application to COVID-19 Outbreaks. Environmental Science & Technology. 2022; 56(2):1125–37. [https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est).\
    1c06531 PMID: 34985868\
22. Peng Z, Jimenez JL. Exhaled CO2 as a COVID-19 Infection Risk Proxy for Different Indoor Environments and Activities. Environmental Science & Technology Letters. 2021; 8(5):392–7. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)\
    10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00183 PMID: 37566374\
23. Metrorail Fleet Management Plan: Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority; 2021 \[April 21,\
    2023\]. Available from: [https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/plans/upload/Metrorail-Fleet-Management-](https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/plans/upload/Metrorail-Fleet-Management-)\
    Plan.pdf.\
24. The MBTA Vehicle Inventory Page \[cited 2023 February 16\]. Available from: [http://roster.transithistory](http://roster.transithistory/).\
    org/.\
25. Boston LRV: Ansaldobreda SpA; \[cited 2023 February 16\]. Available from: [https://trampicturebook.de/](https://trampicturebook.de/)\
    tram/download/ansaldobreda/BostonLightRail.pdf.\
26. New York City Subway Current Fleet \[cited 2022 October 31\]. Available from: [https://www.nycsubway](https://www.nycsubway/).\
    org/wiki/Current\_Fleet.\
27. CTA Car Roster \[cited 2023 February 16\]. Available from: [https://www.chicago-l.org/trains/roster/](https://www.chicago-l.org/trains/roster/).\
28. Burd C, Burrows M, McKenzie B. Travel Time to Work in the United States: 2019. American Community\
    Survey Reports \[updated March 2021April 3, 2023\]. Available from: [https://www.census.gov/content/](https://www.census.gov/content/)\
    dam/Census/library/publications/2021/acs/acs-47.pdf.\
29. Schwartz S. Public Transit and COVID-19 Pandemic: Global Research and Best Practices. Sam\
    Schwartz Consulting, 2020 September. Report No.\
30. Transport Chicago 2020—Keynote Address: Sam Schwartz. 2020.\
31. How’s The Air In There? A Look At Ventilation On The MBTA: wbur; 2020 \[updated September 28; cited\
    2022 November 8\]. Available from: [https://www.wbur.org/news/2020/09/28/mbta-ventilation](https://www.wbur.org/news/2020/09/28/mbta-ventilation).\
32. Mayor Lightfoot Announces CTA To Provide Rear Door Boarding, New System to Reduce Crowding on\
    All Buses: City of Chicago; 2020 \[updated April 9; cited 2023 April 11\]. Available from: [https://www](https://www/).\
    chicago.gov/city/en/depts/mayor/press\_room/press\_releases/2020/april/BusRearDoorEntry.html.\
33. Sutter L. CTA Increases Capacity Limits on Buses and Trains: NBC Chicago; 2021 \[updated March 28;\
    cited 2023 April 11\]. Available from: [https://www.nbcchicago.com/news/local/cta-increases-capacitylimits-on-buses-and-trains/2473143/](https://www.nbcchicago.com/news/local/cta-increases-capacitylimits-on-buses-and-trains/2473143/).\
34. Freishtat S. CTA ends capacity limits on trains, buses as Chicago reopens: Chicago Tribune; 2021\
    \[updated Jun 11; cited 2023 April 11\]. Available from: [https://www.chicagotribune.com/business/ctprem-biz-cta-bus-l-capacity-limit-20210611-evl5yvjxi5e3fobsy7qklto4ca-story.html](https://www.chicagotribune.com/business/ctprem-biz-cta-bus-l-capacity-limit-20210611-evl5yvjxi5e3fobsy7qklto4ca-story.html).\
35. Coronavirus: Operations: Chicago Transit Authority; \[cited 2023 April 11\]. Available from: [https://www](https://www/).\
    transitchicago.com/coronavirus/operations/#:~:text=Effective%20June%2011%2C%20with%20the,to\
    %20run%20at%20full%20capacity.\
36. New CTA rail cars make their debut 2010 \[updated April 19; cited 2023 April 25\]. Available from: https://\
    web.archive.org/web/20100422211206/ [http://www.chicagobreakingnews.com/2010/04/new-cta-railcars-make-their-debut.html](http://www.chicagobreakingnews.com/2010/04/new-cta-railcars-make-their-debut.html).\
37. Klaassen F, Chitwood MH, Cohen T, Pitzer VE, Russi M, Swartwood NA, et al. Population immunity to\
    pre-Omicron and Omicron SARS-CoV-2 variants in US states and counties through December 1, 2021.\
    Clin Infect Dis. 2022. Epub 20220620. [https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.12.23.21268272](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.12.23.21268272) PMID: 34981078\
38. Klaassen F, Chitwood MH, Cohen T, Pitzer VE, Russi M, Swartwood NA, et al. Changes in Population\
    Immunity Against Infection and Severe Disease From Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Omicron Variants in the United States Between December 2021 and November 2022. Clin Infect\
    Dis. 2023; 77(3):355–61. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciad210](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciad210) PMID: 37074868\
\
* * *\
\
39. Campbell F, Archer B, Laurenson-Schafer H, Jinnai Y, Konings F, Batra N, et al. Increased transmissibility and global spread of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern as at June 2021. Euro Surveill. 2021; 26\
    (24). [https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.24.2100509](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.24.2100509) PMID: 34142653\
40. Burki TK. Omicron variant and booster COVID-19 vaccines. Lancet Respir Med. 2022; 10(2):e17. Epub\
41. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00559-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00559-2) PMID: 34929158\
42. Earnest R, Uddin R, Matluk N, Renzette N, Turbett SE, Siddle KJ, et al. Comparative transmissibility of\
    SARS-CoV-2 variants Delta and Alpha in New England, USA. Cell Rep Med. 2022; 3(4):100583. Epub\
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100583](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100583) PMID: 20220311.\
43. Davies A, Thompson KA, Giri K, Kafatos G, Walker J, Bennett A. Testing the efficacy of homemade\
    masks: would they protect in an influenza pandemic? Disaster Med Public Health Prep. 2013; 7(4):413–\
44. [https://doi.org/10.1017/dmp.2013.43](https://doi.org/10.1017/dmp.2013.43) PMID: 24229526\
45. Milton DK, Fabian MP, Cowling BJ, Grantham ML, McDevitt JJ. Influenza virus aerosols in human\
    exhaled breath: particle size, culturability, and effect of surgical masks. PLoS Pathog. 2013; 9(3):\
    e1003205. Epub 20130307. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1003205](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1003205) PMID: 23505369\
46. Fischer CB, Adrien N, Silguero JJ, Hopper JJ, Chowdhury AI, Werler MM. Mask adherence and rate of\
    COVID-19 across the United States. PLoS One. 2021; 16(4):e0249891. Epub 20210414. [https://doi](https://doi/).\
    org/10.1371/journal.pone.0249891 PMID: 33852626\
47. State Population Totals and Components of Change: 2020–2022: United States Census Bureau; 2023\
    \[updated March 23; cited 2023 April 7\]. Available from: [https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/](https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/)\
    demo/popest/2020s-state-total.html.\
48. COVID-19 Projections: Mask use: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME); \[cited 2022 Nov\
    14\]. Available from: [https://covid19.healthdata.org/united-states-of-america?view=mask-use&tab=](https://covid19.healthdata.org/united-states-of-america?view=mask-use&tab=)\
    trend.\
49. Team C-F. Variation in the COVID-19 infection-fatality ratio by age, time, and geography during the prevaccine era: a systematic analysis. Lancet. 2022; 399(10334):1469–88. Epub 20220224. [https://doi](https://doi/).\
    org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02867-1 PMID: 35219376\
50. Sullivan PS, Siegler AJ, Shioda K, Hall EW, Bradley H, Sanchez T, et al. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Cumulative Incidence, United States, August 2020-December 2020. Clin Infect\
    Dis. 2022; 74(7):1141–50. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab626](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab626) PMID: 34245245\
51. Sigal A, Milo R, Jassat W. Estimating disease severity of Omicron and Delta SARS-CoV-2 infections.\
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2022; 22(5):267–9. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-022-00720-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-022-00720-5) PMID: 35414124\
52. COVID-19 Results Briefing: IHME; \[cited 2023 December 2, 2022\]. Available from: [https://www](https://www/).\
    healthdata.org/sites/default/files/files/1\_briefing\_Global\_6.pdf.\
53. What Is the Death Rate of Omicron? It’s WAY Less Than You Think \[updated January 30, 2022April 6,\
    2023\]. Available from: [https://centerforneurologyandspine.com/what-is-the-death-rate-of-omicron-itsway-less-than-you-think/](https://centerforneurologyandspine.com/what-is-the-death-rate-of-omicron-itsway-less-than-you-think/).\
54. Amazon marketplace \[cited 2023 March 21\]. Available from: [https://www.amazon.com/s?k=face](https://www.amazon.com/s?k=face)\
    +mask&crid=2F5O5DE1DV7BG&sprefix=face+mask%2Caps%2C104&ref=nb\_sb\_noss\_1.\
55. Rice KL, Miller GF, Coronado F, Meltzer MI. Estimated Resource Costs for Implementation of CDC’s\
    Recommended COVID-19 Mitigation Strategies in Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 12 Public Schools\
    —United States, 2020–21 School Year. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020; 69(50):1917–21. Epub\
    [https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6950e1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6950e1) PMID: 33332295.\
56. Spennemann DHR. Facing COVID-19: Quantifying the Use of Reusable vs. Disposable Facemasks.\
    Hygiene. 2021; 1(3):120–8. [https://doi.org/10.3390/hygiene1030011](https://doi.org/10.3390/hygiene1030011).\
57. Poster Prints: FedEx Office; \[cited 2023 March 31\]. Available from: [https://www.office.fedex.com/](https://www.office.fedex.com/)\
    default/posters.html.\
58. New York City Transit: Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA). Available from: [https://new.mta](https://new.mta/).\
    info/agency/new-york-city-transit.\
59. Facts at a glance: Chicago Transit Authority (CTA); \[cited 2023 March 31\]. Available from: [https://www](https://www/).\
    transitchicago.com/facts/.\
60. Railcar and Railcar Facilities Investments: Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority; \[cited 2023\
    March 31\]. Available from: [https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/capital-improvement-program/](https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/capital-improvement-program/)\
    investments/Railcar-Investments.cfm#:~:text=Metro%20operates%20over%201%2C200%20railcars,\
    in%20railcars%20and%20associated%20facilities.\
61. Pan JY, Liu D. Mask-wearing intentions on airplanes during COVID-19—Application of theory of\
    planned behavior model. Transp Policy (Oxf). 2022; 119:32–44. Epub 20220214. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).\
    1016/j.tranpol.2022.01.023 PMID: 35185300\
62. Everything you need to know about fares and tolls in New York: Metropolitan Transportation Authority\
    (MTA); \[cited 2023 April 3\]. Available from: [https://new.mta.info/fares](https://new.mta.info/fares).\
\
* * *\
\
61. Cost to Ride: Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA); \[cited 2023 April 3\]. Available\
    from: [https://www.wmata.com/fares/basic.cfm](https://www.wmata.com/fares/basic.cfm).\
62. COVID-19 Cost Tracker: COVID-19 Medical and Hospitalization Costs: National: FAIR Health; 2021\
    \[cited 2023 Mar 13,\]. Available from: [https://s3.amazonaws.com/media2.fairhealth.org/infographic/](https://s3.amazonaws.com/media2.fairhealth.org/infographic/)\
    asset/COVID-19%20Medical%20Hospitalization%20Costs%20by%20State%20-%20FINAL\_National.\
    pdf.\
63. Weiner JP, Bandeian S, Hatef E, Lans D, Liu A, Lemke KW. In-Person and Telehealth Ambulatory Contacts and Costs in a Large US Insured Cohort Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA Netw\
    Open. 2021; 4(3):e212618. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.2618](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.2618) PMID:\
65. Bartsch SM, Ferguson MC, McKinnell JA, O’Shea KJ, Wedlock PT, Siegmund SS, Lee BY. The Potential Health Care Costs And Resource Use Associated With COVID-19 In The United States. Health Aff\
    (Millwood). 2020; 39(6):927–35. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00426](https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00426) PMID: 32324428.\
66. Shrestha SS, Kompaniyets L, Grosse SD, Harris AM, Baggs J, Sircar K, Gundlapalli AV. Estimation of\
    Coronavirus Disease 2019 Hospitalization Costs From a Large Electronic Administrative Discharge\
    Database, March 2020-July 2021. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2021; 8(12):ofab561. Epub 20211220.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofab561](https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofab561) PMID: 34938822\
67. Ohsfeldt RL, Choong CK, Mc Collam PL, Abedtash H, Kelton KA, Burge R. Inpatient Hospital Costs for\
    COVID-19 Patients in the United States. Adv Ther. 2021; 38(11):5557–95. Epub 20211005. [https://doi](https://doi/).\
    org/10.1007/s12325-021-01887-4 PMID: 34609704\
68. Wager E, Claxton G, Amin K, Cox C. Cost of COVID-19 hospital admissions among people with private\
    health coverage: The Peterson Center on Healthcare and Kaiser Family Foundation; 2022 \[Mar 13,\
    2023\]. Available from: [https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/brief/cost-of-covid-19-hospital-admissionsamong-people-with-private-health-coverage/#Average%20costs%20for%20inpatient%20COVID-19%](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/brief/cost-of-covid-19-hospital-admissionsamong-people-with-private-health-coverage/#Average%20costs%20for%20inpatient%20COVID-19%)\
    20admissions%20among%20people%20with%20large%20employer%20health%20coverage,%\
    202020%C2%A0.\
69. Tsai Y, Vogt TM, Zhou F. Patient Characteristics and Costs Associated With COVID-19-Related Medical Care Among Medicare Fee-for-Service Beneficiaries. Ann Intern Med. 2021; 174(8):1101–9. Epub\
70. [https://doi.org/10.7326/M21-1102](https://doi.org/10.7326/M21-1102) PMID: 34058109\
71. Nowotny K, Metheny H, LeMasters K, Brinkley-Rubinstein L. Age and COVID-19 mortality in the United\
    States: a comparison of the prison and general population. Int J Prison Health. 2022;ahead-of-print\
    (ahead-of-print). Epub 20220623. [https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPH-08-2021-0069](https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPH-08-2021-0069) PMID: 35727567\
72. Testa CC, Krieger N, Chen JT, Hanage WP. Visualizing the lagged connection between COVID-19\
    cases and deaths in the United States: An animation using per capita state-level data (January 22, 2020\
    –July 8, 2020). The Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies Working Paper. 2020;19.\
73. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection Survey technical article: waves and lags of COVID-19 in England,\
    June 2021. Office for National Statistics. United Kingdom: 2021 June 29. Report No.\
74. The National Transit Database (NTD): Monthly Ridership: Federal Transit Administration; \[October 28,\
    2022\]. Available from: [https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/ntd-data?field\_data\_categories\_target\_id%](https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/ntd-data?field_data_categories_target_id%)\
    5B2536%5D=2536&field\_product\_type\_target\_id=All&year=all&combine=.\
75. Tsai V, Khan NM, Shi J, Rainey J, Gao H, Zheteyeva Y. Evaluation of Unintended Social and Economic\
    Consequences of an Unplanned School Closure in Rural Illinois. J Sch Health. 2017; 87(7):546–53.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1111/josh.12525](https://doi.org/10.1111/josh.12525) PMID: 28580673\
76. Appendix D: updating value per statistical life (VSL) estimates for inflation and changes in real income:\
    ASPE; \[April 14, 2023\]. Available from: [https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/updating-vsl-estimates](https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/updating-vsl-estimates).\
77. Esper FP, Adhikari TM, Tu ZJ, Cheng YW, El-Haddad K, Farkas DH, et al. Alpha to Omicron: Disease\
    Severity and Clinical Outcomes of Major SARS-CoV-2 Variants. J Infect Dis. 2023; 227(3):344–52.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiac411](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiac411) PMID: 36214810\
78. Nyberg T, Ferguson NM, Nash SG, Webster HH, Flaxman S, Andrews N, et al. Comparative analysis of\
    the risks of hospitalisation and death associated with SARS-CoV-2 omicron (B.1.1.529) and delta\
    (B.1.617.2) variants in England: a cohort study. Lancet. 2022; 399(10332):1303–12. Epub 20220316.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(22)00462-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(22)00462-7) PMID: 35305296\
79. Christensen PA, Olsen RJ, Long SW, Snehal R, Davis JJ, Ojeda Saavedra M, et al. Signals of Significantly Increased Vaccine Breakthrough, Decreased Hospitalization Rates, and Less Severe Disease in\
    Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 Caused by the Omicron Variant of Severe Acute Respiratory\
    Syndrome Coronavirus 2 in Houston, Texas. Am J Pathol. 2022; 192(4):642–52. Epub 20220203.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2022.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2022.01.007) PMID: 35123975\
80. Lauring AS, Tenforde MW, Chappell JD, Gaglani M, Ginde AA, McNeal T, et al. Clinical severity of, and\
    effectiveness of mRNA vaccines against, covid-19 from omicron, delta, and alpha SARS-CoV-2 variants in the United States: prospective observational study. Bmj. 2022; 376:e069761. Epub\
81. [https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj-2021-069761](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj-2021-069761) PMID: 35264324\
82. MTA Subway and Bus Mask Compliance Statistics: 2020–2022: Metropolitan Transportation Authority;\
    2022 \[updated June 14; cited 2023 September 27\]. Available from: [https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/](https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/)\
    MTA-Subway-and-Bus-Mask-Compliance-Statistics-2020/ijxr-nffj.\
83. Masks No Longer Required on Subways, Buses and Commuter Railroads: Metropolitan Transportation\
    Authority; 2022 \[updated September 7; cited 2023 September 27\]. Available from: [https://new.mta.info/](https://new.mta.info/)\
    press-release/masks-no-longer-required-subways-buses-and-commuter-railroads.\
84. Amid Ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic, Governor Cuomo Issues Executive Order Requiring All People in\
    New York to Wear Masks or Face Coverings in Public: New York State; 2020 \[updated April 15; cited\
    2023 September 27\]. Available from: [https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/amid-ongoing-covid-19-](https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/amid-ongoing-covid-19-)\
    pandemic-governor-cuomo-issues-executive-order-requiring-all-people-new.\
85. Scientific Brief: SARS-CoV-2 Transmission: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; \[updated May\
    7, 2021February 14, 2023\]. Available from: [https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/)\
    science-briefs/sars-cov-2-transmission.html.\
86. Miller D, King MF, Nally J, Drodge JR, Reeves GI, Bate AM, et al. Modeling the factors that influence\
    exposure to SARS-CoV-2 on a subway train carriage. Indoor Air. 2022; 32(2):e12976. Epub 20220208.\
    [https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12976](https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12976) PMID: 35133673\
87. Post-COVID Conditions: Information for Healthcare Providers: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; \[updated December 16, 2022June 27, 2023\]. Available from: [https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/)\
    2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-care/post-covid-conditions.html.\
88. Kim DD, Silver MC, Kunst N, Cohen JT, Ollendorf DA, Neumann PJ. Perspective and Costing in Cost-\
    Effectiveness Analysis, 1974–2018. Pharmacoeconomics. 2020; 38(10):1135–45. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10).\
    1007/s40273-020-00942-2 PMID: 32696192\
89. Bin-Reza F, Lopez Chavarrias V, Nicoll A, Chamberland ME. The use of masks and respirators to prevent transmission of influenza: a systematic review of the scientific evidence. Influenza Other Respir\
    Viruses. 2012; 6(4):257–67. Epub [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-2659.2011.00307.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-2659.2011.00307.x) PMID: 22188875.