Influenza Virus in Human Exhaled Breath: An
Observational Study

1,2 1,2
Patricia Fabian \*, James J. McDevitt, Wesley H. DeHaan3, Rita O. P. Fung4, Benjamin J. Cowling4,
1,2
Kwok Hung Chan5, Gabriel M. Leung4, Donald K. Milton

1 Work Environment Department, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, Massachusetts, United States of America, 2 Department of Environmental Health, Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America, 3 Pulmatrix Inc., Lexington, Massachusetts, United States of America, 4 Department of
Community Medicine and School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 5 Department of Microbiology, The
University of Hong Kong and Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China

Abstract

Background: Recent studies suggest that humans exhale fine particles during tidal breathing but little is known of their
composition, particularly during infection.

Methodology/Principal Findings: We conducted a study of influenza infected patients to characterize influenza virus and
particle concentrations in their exhaled breath. Patients presenting with influenza-like-illness, confirmed influenza A or B
virus by rapid test, and onset within 3 days were recruited at three clinics in Hong Kong, China. We collected exhaled breath
from each subject onto Teflon filters and measured exhaled particle concentrations using an optical particle counter. Filters
were analyzed for influenza A and B viruses by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Twelve out of thirteen rapid
test positive patients provided exhaled breath filter samples (7 subjects infected with influenza B virus and 5 subjects
infected with influenza A virus). We detected influenza virus RNA in the exhaled breath of 4 (33%) subjects–three (60%) of
the five patients infected with influenza A virus and one (14%) of the seven infected with influenza B virus. Exhaled influenza
virus RNA generation rates ranged from ,3.2 to 20 influenza virus RNA particles per minute. Over 87% of particles exhaled
were under 1 mm in diameter.

Conclusions: These findings regarding influenza virus RNA suggest that influenza virus may be contained in fine particles
generated during tidal breathing, and add to the body of literature suggesting that fine particle aerosols may play a role in
influenza transmission.

Editor: Ron A. M. Fouchier, Erasmus Medical Center, Netherlands

Funding: This work has received financial support from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (cooperative grants #1U01CI000439-01and
#1U01CI000446-01), the Research Fund for the Control of Infectious Disease, Food and Health Bureau, Government of the Hong Kong SAR, and the Area of
Excellence Scheme of the Hong Kong University Grants Committee (grant no. AoE/M-12/06). This work was also supported by the U.S. Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) Office of Aerospace Medicine through the Air Transportation Center of Excellence for Airliner Cabin Environment Research (ACER),
Cooperative Agreements 04-C-ACE-HU. Although the FAA and CDC have sponsored this project, they neither endorse nor reject the findings of this research.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Although the pathogen responsible for human influenza virus
infection was described over 70 years ago, ‘‘our understanding of
the transmission of influenza’’ has recently been characterized as
‘‘woefully inadequate’’ \[1\]. The US Department of Health and
Human Services Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Plan \[2\]
concluded that the relative importance for influenza transmission
of direct contact, large droplet, and airborne small particles is not
known. Two recent reviews in respected journals reached opposite
conclusions about how influenza is transmitted \[3,4\]. After
reviewing the same epidemiology, animal model, and case study
data, one review classified influenza as an opportunistically, and
only rarely, airborne transmitted disease while the other review
suggested that influenza is preferentially or obligatorily airborne
transmitted\[5\]. An Institute of Medicine report in 2007 stated that
the ‘‘paucity of definitive data on influenza transmission is a

Introduction

- E-mail: [patricia\_fabian@uml.edu](mailto:patricia_fabian@uml.edu)

implement effective prevention strategies’’\[1\].
Little is known about the aerosols produced by influenzainfected subjects. In studies of exhaled breath particles from
healthy subjects during tidal breathing, researchers reported
concentrations from 1 to .10,000 particles per liter, with the
majority less than 0.3 mm in diameter \[6–8\]. One of these studies
also reported that 55% of the population studied exhaled.98% of
the particles and concluded that these subjects–classified as ‘‘high
producers’’–could over time exhale more particles during normal
tidal breathing than during relatively infrequent coughing or
sneezing events \[8\]. If particles exhaled during tidal breathing
contain infectious viruses, Edwards’ finding may have important
implications for airborne transmission of infectious diseases. In
animal models, influenza infection by airborne transmission has
been demonstrated in monkeys \[9\], ferrets \[10–12\], mice \[13–20\],
and guinea pigs \[21,22\]. Recent work by Huynh et al showed

critical gap in the knowledge base needed to develop and
implement effective prevention strategies’’\[1\].

* * *

To address gaps in our knowledge regarding the generation of
influenza virus aerosols, we report the concentration of influenza
virus RNA in the exhaled breath of persons infected with
influenza, and characterize their exhaled breath particle production during tidal breathing.

Results

A total of 68 rapid flu tests were administered from July 23
through September 14, 2007: thirty-six were collected at Site A,
thirty at site B, and two from Site C. Over half (55%) of the
screened population was male, the average age was 35 years
(SD = 12), the average body temperature was 38.1 (SD = 0.7).
Only 9% of the screened subjects had been vaccinated for the
2007 season, and 8% reported having at least one influenza
vaccine in a previous influenza season. Thirty six of 68 subjects
given the rapid test completed the symptoms part of the
questionnaire and of these over 80% reported having cough,
headaches, fatigue, and sore throat.

Exhaled breath results
Thirteen (19%) of the subjects tested positive for influenza using

SD = standard deviation
\*\*
Increase in production or changes in character (color, consistency)

\*\*
Increase in production or changes in character (color, consistency)
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002691.t001

|  | Exhaled breath negative | Exhaled breath positive |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Total number | 8 | 4 |
| Male | 75% | 75% |
| Average age(years)(SD\*) | 37(14) | 34(19) |
| Age range(years) | 19-61 | 14-51 |
| Body temperature(℃)(SD\*) | 38.3(0.4) | 38.7(0.6) |
| Symptom onset |  |  |
| 1-2 days past | 75% | 50% |
| 3-5 days past | 25% | 50% |
| Vaccinated this season | 13% | 0% |
| Symptoms |  |  |
| Cough | 100% | 75% |
| Sputum changes\*\* | 13% | 25% |
| Fatigue | 100% | 100% |
| Malaise | 63% | 75% |
| Headache | 100% | 100% |
| Sore throat | 100% | 75% |
| Diarrhea | 0% | 0% |
| Dyspnea | 25% | 25% |
| Chills | 63% | 50% |
| Sweats | 63% | 50% |

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002691.t001

subjects were infected with influenza A virus and 7 subjects were
infected with influenza B virus. Twelve of the 13 subjects provided
exhaled breath filter samples; one subject reported feeling too
fatigued and did not participate. Field blank filters were collected
from two uninfected individuals. Analysis of the flow-time record
supported the observation by field technicians that none of the
subjects coughed during filter collection.
We detected influenza virus RNA in the exhaled breath of 4

We detected influenza virus RNA in the exhaled breath of 4
(33%) subjects: three (60%) of the five patients infected with
influenza A virus and one (14%) of the seven infected with
influenza B virus. There was no correlation between nasal and
throat swab influenza virus RNA concentrations and exhaled
breath influenza virus RNA concentrations. Table 1 presents the
demographic characteristics and symptoms of subjects, stratified
according to whether they had detectable influenza virus RNA in
their exhaled breath.
Concentrations in exhaled breath samples ranged from ,48 to

Concentrations in exhaled breath samples ranged from ,48 to
300 influenza virus RNA copies per filter on the positive samples,
corresponding to exhaled breath generation rates ranging from
,3.2 to 20 influenza virus RNA copies per minute. Table 2
presents the influenza virus type, viral RNA exhalation rate, and
viral RNA copies detected per well in each qPCR replicate from
the exhaled breath analysis of 12 tested subjects. All influenza A
virus samples were hemagglutinin type H3. Laboratory blanks and
the two field blanks collected were negative.

a
Number of influenza RNA copies detected per well (5 ml cDNA per well).
b
Influenza virus RNA copies/ minute
ND = not detected by qPCR; limit of quantification was 6 influenza virus RNA

|  |  | qPCR of Filter Extracta |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Subject ID | Influenza virus type (sub-type) | Replicate 1 | Replicate 2 | Replicate 3 | Influenza virus RNA exhalation rateb |
| A-06 | A(H3) | 47 | 21 | 44 | 20 |
| A-07 | A(H3) | ND | ND | <6> | <3.2> |
| A-08 | B | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| A-11 | B | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| A-21 | A(H3) | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| A-23 | A(H3) | ND | ND | <6> | <3.2> |
| A-24 | B | ND | 7 | ND | <3.2> |
| A-25 | B | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| A-34 | B | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| B-01 | A(H3) | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| B-09 | B | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| B-25 | B | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| A-37(control) |  | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| A-38(control) |  | ND | ND | ND | ND |

ND = not detected by qPCR; limit of quantification was 6 influenza virus RNA
copies per qPCR well when all three replicates were detected.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002691.t002 concentrations ranged from 67 to 8,500 particles per liter of air.
Particle concentrations in the size selective bins ranged from 61 to
3,848 L21 (particles between 0.3 mm and ,0.5 mm), 5 to 2,756
L21 (0.5 mm and,1 mm), 1 to 1,916 L21 (1 mm and,5 mm), and

3,848 L21 (particles between 0.3 mm and ,0.5 mm), 5 to 2,756
L21 (0.5 mm and,1 mm), 1 to 1,916 L21
21
0to9L ($5 mm).
distribution of the particles measured from all 10 subjects. On
average 70% of the particles measured were between 0.3 mm and
,0.5 mm, 17% between 0.5 mm and ,1 mm, and 13% between
1 mm and,5 mm.
recorded (,0.1%). Of the 10 subjects, 50% exhaled more than
500 particles per liter of air. Two control samples were collected
from asymptomatic subjects who were not infected with influenza.
Both controls exhaled more than 500 particles per liter of air.

(particles between 0.3 mm and ,0.5 mm), 5 to 2,756
(0.5 mm and,1 mm), 1 to 1,916 L21 (1 mm and,5 mm), and
($5 mm). Figure 1 presents the averaged size
distribution of the particles measured from all 10 subjects. On
average 70% of the particles measured were between 0.3 mm and
,0.5 mm, 17% between 0.5 mm and ,1 mm, and 13% between
,5 mm. Particles larger than 5 mm were rarely
recorded (,0.1%). Of the 10 subjects, 50% exhaled more than
500 particles per liter of air. Two control samples were collected
from asymptomatic subjects who were not infected with influenza.
Both controls exhaled more than 500 particles per liter of air.

3,\ 848\ \\mathrm{L}^{-1}

<0.5~\\mathrm{\ m m}

\\dot{\\mathrm{L}^{-1}\\left(0.5\\right.}

\\mathrm{l,}9\\dot{\\mathrm{l}}66,\\mathrm{L}^{-1},(\\mathrm{l}\ \ \\upmu\\mathrm{m}

{{<}}5

\\dot{\\mathcal{L}}^{-1}\ (\\geq{5\ \\upmu\\mathrm{m}})

0.3~\\upmu\\mathrm{m}

{0.5}~\\up{upmumu}

<1~\\upmu\\mathrm{m}

1~\\upmu\\mathrm{m m}

{5}~{\\upmu\\mathrmmu{m}}

(<0.1,%)

Discussion

We detected influenza virus RNA in the exhaled breath of 33%
of subjects with laboratory-confirmed
studies have examined microorganisms in exhaled breath: Couch
et al. published two reports of finding infectious Coxsackievirus in
large droplets and droplet nuclei generated by coughs and sneezes
\[24–26\]; Fennelly et al. recovered Mycobacterium tuberculosis from
infected patients who coughed into a collection box \[27\]; Downie
et al recovered infectious variola virus from smallpox patients who
talked next to an impinger \[28\]; Duguid et al. recovered indicator
oral bacteria from healthy subjects during nasal breathing, talking,
coughing, and sneezing, but none were recovered during mouth
breathing \[29\]. More recently Huynh et al looked for rhinovirus,

We detected influenza virus RNA in the exhaled breath of 33%
influenza. Few previous
studies have examined microorganisms in exhaled breath: Couch
et al. published two reports of finding infectious Coxsackievirus in
large droplets and droplet nuclei generated by coughs and sneezes
\[24–26\]; Fennelly et al. recovered Mycobacterium tuberculosis from
infected patients who coughed into a collection box \[27\]; Downie
et al recovered infectious variola virus from smallpox patients who
talked next to an impinger \[28\]; Duguid et al. recovered indicator
oral bacteria from healthy subjects during nasal breathing, talking,
coughing, and sneezing, but none were recovered during mouth
breathing \[29\]. More recently Huynh et al looked for rhinovirus,

breathing \[29\]. More recently Huynh et al looked for rhinovirus,
parainfluenza and influenza viruses from infected subjects who

were able to recover rhinovirus RNA and parainfluenza virus
RNA from coughing and talking maneuvers, and rhinovirus RNA

RNA from coughing and talking maneuvers, and rhinovirus RNA
from tidal breaths; no influenza virus RNA was recovered. To the
best of our knowledge, previous exhaled breath studies have not
reported detection of influenza virus RNA aerosols during tidal

breathing.
Rudnick and Milton \[30\] used data from the influenza outbreak

\\mathrm{\\boldmath~\ \ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

highly infectious influenza case. In this equation a quantum is the
infectious dose needed to initiate disease in 63% of exposed
subjects, is equivalent to an ID63, and can contain a number of
infectious viruses \[33\]. In the present study, we measured
generation rates of ,192 and 1200 influenza virus RNA copies
per hour for subjects with detectable influenza virus RNA in their
breath. Assuming each RNA copy represents one infectious virus,
and if, as Alford et al suggested \[34,35\], the human infectious dose
50% (ID50) by aerosol is between 0.6 and 3 TCID50, then one
quanta equals approximately one TCID50. This implies that the
quantum generation rate we measured in our subjects is 10-fold
higher than the Rudnick and Milton estimate for a ‘‘superspreader’’. However, not all viral RNA copies detected by PCR
are necessarily infectious. We found that our laboratory virus
stocks have a ratio of 300 virus particles per infectious virus
(characterized using real-time PCR and a cell culture-based
infectivity assay, data not shown)–a ratio consistent with reports
from other laboratories \[36–38\]. Thus the generation rate of
th
infectious viruses may be as little as 1/300 of the total number
determined by PCR and the resulting estimates of quantum
generation rate (,0.64 to 4 quanta/h) from our data are lower
than those estimated for a superspreader by Rudnick and Milton.
However, estimates based on tissue culture virus to RNA ratios
may be overly conservative because clinical specimens and
aerosols may have fewer defective viruses and less viral nucleic
acid which is not associated with virus particles.
Possible explanations for not detecting influenza virus RNA in a

\\mathrm{I D}\_{63}.

\\mathrm{T C I D}\_{50}

^mathrm a!}

{\\leqslant<}192

50%\ (\\mathrm{D}\_{50})

1/300^{\\mathrm{t h}}

acid which is not associated with virus particles.
Possible explanations for not detecting influenza virus RNA in a
larger proportion of subjects may be due to short sample collection
times, the large heterogeneity in the virus production among
2 7
infected patients (between 10 and 10 TCID50/ml of nasophand
ryngeal fluid on the 2 day following infection \[39\]), and the
detection limit for our qPCR method. The qPCR method can
quantify as few as 6 influenza virus RNA copies per qPCR well,
corresponding to 48 influenza virus RNA copies per filter or an
exhaled breath generation rate of 3.2 influenza virus RNA copies
per minute for a 15 minute sample. For the PCR to be considered
quantifiable in our study, all three sample replicates had to cross
the fluorescence signal threshold. Samples for which only one or
two of the replicates crossed the threshold were considered positive
but not quantifiable, and labeled,3.2 influenza virus RNA

\ 0^{7}\ \\mathrm{T C I D}\_{50}/\\mathrm{m l}

10^{2}

2^{\\mathrm{n d}}

Figure 1. Exhaled breath particle size distribution averaged from 10 influenza infected subjects.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002691.g001 copies/min (Table 2). With this criterion only one subject had a
quantifiable generation rate of 20 influenza virus RNA copies/
min, three generated less than 3.2 influenza virus RNA copies/
min and the remaining either didn’t exhale influenza virus
aerosols, or generated undetectable numbers of influenza virus
RNA copies/min.
Influenza-infected subjects exhaled from 67 to 8,500 particles

Influenza-infected subjects exhaled from 67 to 8,500 particles
per liter of air (geometric mean = 724); 50% of subjects exhaled
more than 500 particles per liter, a suggested threshold for
identification of high particle producers \[8\]. These results are
consistent with a previous study that measured particle concentrations of 14 to 3,230 particles per liter and also reported 54%
high particle producers among healthy adults using similar optical
counting methods \[8\]. Other studies of exhaled breath reported
particle concentrations of 20 and 400 particles per liter \[40\], or a
geometric mean of 230 particles per liter \[6\]. The numbers of
subjects in the published exhaled breath studies to date have all
been less than eleven. Larger studies of exhaled breath particle
concentrations are needed to better characterize the population
distribution of particle generation rates. Our study also had a small
number of subjects, and we do not have enough information to
suggest a relationship between particle production and the
probability of influenza virus RNA detection.
Although we don’t know whether the RNA we detected

probability of influenza virus RNA detection.
Although we don’t know whether the RNA we detected
originated from free nucleic acid, infectious, or non-infectious
viruses, the data presented here show that aerosols of influenza
virus origin are generated during tidal breathing. Our sampling
protocol required subjects to tidal breathe and patients did not
cough during sample collection. The data also suggest that
influenza virus RNA is contained in fine particles because over
87% of the exhaled particles were under 1 mm and less than 0.1%
were larger than 5 mm. This distribution of particle sizes is
consistent with previous studies showing that 98% of particles
produced during normal breathing are under 1 mm \[6–8\]. Thus,
based on the particle size distribution, it is unlikely that the viral
RNA detected was carried on large particles. We also note that the
Exhalair sampler fitted with a face mask as the patient interface
would likely impact most large particles (.20 mm) on the mask or
in tubing connecting the mask to the particle counter and filter
cassette. Therefore, it is likely that the influenza virus RNA we
detected in exhaled breath was contained in exhaled breath
particles ,5.0 mm in diameter. If influenza virus is carried in the
smaller particles and transmission occurs via the airborne route,
the use of interventions such as surgical-type masks as personal
protective equipment may not prevent transmission. However,
larger studies should be conducted to provide baseline data on
particle and infectious influenza virus generation, as well as
potential changes in virus generation due to use of surgical masks
by patients or healthcare professionals.
In order to study infectious viruses we need an efficient viral
aerosol sampler. Most bioaerosol samplers are not suitable for

(>20,\\upmu\\mathrm{m})

Conclusions
The relative

The relative importance of various modes of influenza
transmission continue to be debated \[3,4\]. We detected influenza
virus RNA in the exhaled breath of 4 out of 12 influenza patients
and found that.99% of exhaled particles were,5.0 mmin
diameter. These findings regarding influenza virus RNA suggest
that influenza virus may be contained in fine particles generated
during tidal breathing, and add to the body of literature suggesting
that fine particle aerosols may play a role in influenza
transmission.

{5.0};\\upmu\\mathrm{m}

Materials and Methods

Location and recruitment
This study was conducted on a subset of subjects recruited in a

Location and recruitment
This study was conducted on a subset of subjects recruited in a
randomized trial looking at the efficacy of face masks and hand
hygiene to reduce influenza transmission in Hong Kong residents
\[41\]. We recruited participants at three sites in Hong Kong, China
during July through September of 2007. Subjects 12 years of age
and older who presented with influenza-like illness (ILI) and were
within the first 3 days of onset of symptoms were invited to
participate in the study. A short questionnaire was used to record
age, gender, clinical illness symptoms, medication use, medical and
smoking history. Influenza-like-illness was defined as having a fever
$37.8uC and two or more ILI symptoms (fever, cough, sore throat,
runny nose, headache, malaise). Once written informed consent was
obtained, nasal and throat swabs were collected and analyzed using
a QuickVue Influenza A/B diagnostic test (Quidel Corp., San
Diego, CA) to confirm influenza virus infection. A second set of
nasal and throat swabs was collected and placed in viral transport
media buffer (Earl’s Balanced Salt Solution, 0.1% glucose, 0.5%
bovine albumin and antibiotic) refrigerated at 2–8uC immediately
after collection, stored at 220uC for up to 7 days, and then stored at
280uC until analyzed for laboratory confirmation of influenza virus
infection by PCR. Only subjects who were determined to be
infected with influenza A or B virus according to the rapid
diagnostic test were asked to complete the exhaled breath collection.
The institutional review boards of The University of Hong Kong
and University of Massachusetts Lowell approved the research
protocols. Subjects were compensated for their time and the
inconvenience associated with participating in the study.

2{-}8^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

-20^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

{geq77.8^{\\circ}C}

Particle count and collection system
We collected exhaled breath from subjects using an Exhalair

We collected exhaled breath from subjects using an Exhalair
(Pulmatrix, Lexington, MA) a device which integrates optical
particle counting technology (Airnet 310, Particle Measuring
Systems, Boulder, CO) with airflow data obtained with a mass flow
meter and also collects filter samples. Subjects breathed with a
normal tidal pattern into an oro-nasal facemask (Hans Rudolph,
Shawnee, KS) for approximately 20 minutes total. The face piece
was connected to a respiratory T-valve which was equipped with a
HEPA filter on the intake side to supply particle free, make-up air
at very low resistance. A mass flow meter monitored inhalation
and exhalation flows and the instrument computed and stored
total and per breath flow and volume information. The outflow
side of the T-valve was connected via tubing to first the optical
particle counter and then to the filter sample collection part of the
Exhalair device. The optical particle counter recorded particle
counts in four size bins: 0.3 mm-,0.5, 0.5-,1 mm, 1-,5 mm and
$5 mm. A vacuum pump pulled air through the tubing at 28.3
lpm into a real-time particle counting system during the exhaled
breath particle characterization phase of the test (approximately
5 minutes). After completion of the particle counts, the outflow of
the T-valve was attached to a 37-mm, 2-mm pore-size Teflon filter

-80^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C} with a polymethylpentene (PMP) support ring (Pall Life Sciences,
New York) and the vacuum pump was switched to pull through
the filter during the particle collection phase of the test
(15 minutes). Teflon filters were refrigerated at 2–8uC immediately
after collection, stored at 220uC for up to 7 days, and then stored
at 280uC until analyzed. T-valves and HEPA filters were disposed
of after each use and masks were disinfected using 10% bleach and
autoclaved prior to reuse.

2{-}8^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

-20^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

-80^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

RNA extraction from exhaled breath samples
Influenza virus RNA collected from the exhaled breath on the

RNA extraction from exhaled breath samples
Influenza virus RNA collected from the exhaled breath on the
Teflon filters was extracted using a Trizol-chloroform based method
modified from a protocol developed for extraction of nasal swab and
lavage samples \[42\]. Initially, the PMP support ring surrounding the
Teflon filter was cut 6 to 8 times around the circumference of the
filter and the filter was put into a 50-ml polypropylene centrifuge
tube containing 400 ml of phosphate buffered saline (PBS). A 10 ml
mixture containing 20 mg glycogen (Ambion, Austin, TX), 15 mg
glycoblue (Ambion, Austin, TX), 50 ng of Human DNA (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA) in PBS was added directly to each
sample. Next, 750 ml of Trizol LS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) was
added, the sample vortexed for 30 seconds and the liquid transferred
to a 1.7 ml low protein binding tube (LoBind, Eppendorf,
Westbury, NY). The tubes were placed on an MS2 Minshaker
(IKA works, Guangzhou, China) for 10 minutes at 300 rpm. After
mixing, 230 ml of chloroform (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was
added and samples were briefly vortexed and placed on the shaker
at 300 rpm an additional 5 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged
at 21006g for 5 minutes and 700 ml of the aqueous supernatant was
transferred to a tube containing 600 ml of 100% isopropanol
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for RNA precipitation. After
incubating for1 hour at room temperature, RNA was pelleted by
centrifuging for 12 minutes at 200006g at room temperature. The
supernatant was decanted and 600 ml of 75% ethanol were added to
wash the pellets. The RNA pellets were centrifuged for 5 minutes at
200006g, the ethanol decanted and the pellets air dried for
approximately 20 minutes. The RNA was suspended in 20 mlof
nuclease-free water (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) and immediately
converted to cDNA.
RNA extraction from nasal swabs

5^{\\prime}-

Reverse transcription
cDNA was synthesized from purified and concentrated RNA
using a High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA). A 20 ml total reaction volume was
made with 10 ml RNA, 2 ml 10X RT buffer, 0.8 ml dNTP Mix
(100 mM), 2.0 ml 10X RT random hexamer primers, 1.0 ml
TM
MultiScribe reverse transcriptase, 1 ml RNase inhibitor and
3.2 ml nuclease-free water. Synthesis was carried out in an ABI 9700
Thermocycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and reaction
conditions were 25uC for 10 minutes, 37uC for 120 minutes, and
85uC for 5 seconds. cDNA samples were stored at 220uC.

Quantitative PCR
Quantitative PCR was performed using an Applied Biosystems

37^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

25\ ^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

\\mathrm{\\dot{\ M u l t i S c r i b e{}^{\\mathrm{T M}}}}

samples were analyzed in a 96-well plate with an adhesive film
cover (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Each well contained
TM
5 ml of cDNA template, 12.5 ml of 2X Taqman Universal PCR
Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), 900 nM of
each primer and 100 nM probe.
We tested three primer/probe sets on 17 nasal swab samples

-20^{\\circ}\\mathrm{C}

We tested three primer/probe sets on 17 nasal swab samples
collected for this project in order to select the most sensitive for the
exhaled breath and remaining nasal swab samples: a set used by
the Centers for Disease Control, a set used at the Queen Mary
Hospital Virology laboratory (QMH) and a set from the published
literature \[38\]. Based on the sensitivity results from these tests the
following set of primers and probe were selected to analyze the
exhaled breath samples: for influenza A virus two forward primers
59- GGA CTG CAG CGT AGA CGC TT-39 and 59- CAT CCT
GTT GTA TAT GAG GCC CAT-39, reverse primer 59- CAT
TCT GTT GTA TAT GAG GCC CAT- 39, and probe 59FAM-
CTC AGT TAT TCT GCT GGT GCA CTT GCC A-
39TAMRA; for influenza B virus forward primer 59- AAA TAC
GGT GGA TTA AAT AAA AGC AA-39, reverse primer 59-
CCA GCA ATA GCT CCG AAG AAA -39, and probe 59FAM
CAC CCA TAT TGG GCA ATT TCC TAT GGC -39TAMRA
\[38\]. The primers and probe targeted the matrix (M) gene and the
hemagglutinin (HA) gene for influenza A and B viruses
respectively. Primers and probe were manufactured by Sigma-
Proligo (Proligo Singapore Pty Ltd).
We constructed standard curves for the qPCR by making 1:10

\\mathrm{A A\ }3^{\\prime}.

5^{\\prime}.

Proligo (Proligo Singapore Pty Ltd).
We constructed standard curves for the qPCR by making 1:10
dilutions of cDNA made from QMH influenza A and B virus
stocks. Influenza A/PR/8/34 and influenza B/Hong Kong/
AE34/2002 virus stocks were grown at QMH on MDCK cells and
purified via a sucrose density gradient. Once purified, 50 ml
aliquots of each virus were extracted using the Trizol-chloroform
method described previously, synthesized to cDNA using the High
Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA) and quantified by qPCR with a plasmid standard
curve for each influenza virus. The virus concentrations calculated
7 6
based on this method were 1.88610 and 1.66610 virus particles
per ml for the influenza A and B virus stocks, respectively. The
limit of quantification for the qPCR was 6 influenza A or B viral
RNA particles per PCR well, with all three replicates crossing the
qPCR fluorescence threshold within 37 cycles. For the exhaled
breath filters and nasal swabs, samples were considered positive if
at least one of the three replicates crossed the qPCR cycle
threshold, but were only quantifiable if all three replicates crossed
the cycle threshold. Because 25% of the cDNA was used per well
and 50% of the extracted RNA was used to make cDNA, the total
number of virus copies per filter was 8 times the average copy
number per well.

1.66!\\times!10^{6}

1.88!\\times!10^{7}

Data analysis
Exhaled virus concentrations in exhaled breath were computed
from the qPCR results and the Exhalair record of total exhaled
volume during filter sample collection. Total particle concentrations and concentrations in each size bin were calculated for each
breath by dividing the number of particles counted by the volume
exhaled. We then averaged the particle concentrations over all
breaths collected for each subject. Computations were performed
in SAS for Windows (version 9.1.3, Cary, NC).

Influenza virus sub-typing
The RNA from the nasal swab samples positive for influenza A

* * *

Author Contributions

Conceived and designed the experiments: PF JJM WHD GML DKM.
Performed the experiments: PF ROF BJC. Analyzed the data: PF JJM

References

01. Goldfrank LR, Liverman CT (2007) Preparing For An Influenza Pandemic:
    Personal Protective Equipment for Healthcare Workers. Washington D.C.: The
    National Academies Press. 191 p.

02. US-DHHS (2005) HHS Pandemic Influenza Plan. US Department of Health

03. Roy CJ, Milton DK (2004) Airborne transmission of communicable infection-the
    elusive pathway. N Engl J Med 350: 1710–1712.

04. Fairchild CI, Stampfer JF (1987) Particle concentration in exhaled breath. Am
    Ind Hyg Assoc J 48: 948–949.

05. Papineni RS, Rosenthal FS (1997) The size distribution of droplets in the
    exhaled breath of healthy human subjects. J Aerosol Med 10: 105–116.

06. Edwards DA, Man JC, Brand P, Katstra JP, Sommerer K, et al. (2004) Inhaling
    to mitigate exhaled bioaerosols. PNAS 101: 17383–17388.

07. Snyder MH, Stephenson EH, Young H, York CG, Tierney EL, et al. (1986)
    Infectivity and antigenicity of live avian-human influenza A reassortant virus:
    comparison of intranasal and aerosol routes in squirrel monkeys. J Infect Dis
    154: 709–711.

08. Squires S, Belyavin G (1975) Free contact infection in ferret groups. J Antimicrob
    Chemother 1: 35–42.

09. Andrewes CH, Glover RE (1941) Spread of infection from the respiratory tract
    of the ferret. I. Transmission of influenza A virus. British Journal of
    Experimental Pathology 22: 91–97.

10. Glover RE (1941) Spread of infection from the respiratory tract of the ferret. II.
    Association of influenza A virus and Streptococcus group C. British Journal of
    Experimental Pathology 22: 98–107.

11. Edward D, Elford W, Laidlaw P (1943a) Studies of air-borne virus infections. I.
    Experimental technique and preliminary observations on influenza and
    infectious ectromelia. J Hyg (Lond) 43: 1–10.

12. Loosli CG, Hamre D, Berlin BS (1953) Air-borne influenza virus A infections in
    immunized animals. Trans Assoc Am Physicians 66: 222–230.

13. Loosli CG, Hertweck MS, Hockwald RS (1970) Airborne influenza PR8-A virus
    infections in actively immunized mice. Arch Environ Health 21: 332–346.

14. Schulman JL (1967) Experimental transmission of influenza virus infection in
    mice. IV. Relationship of transmissibility of different strains of virus and
    recovery of airborne virus in the environment of infector mice. J Exp Med 125:
    479–488.

15. Schulman JL (1968) The use of an animal model to study transmission of


and Human Services.
3\. Tellier R (2006) Review of aerosol transmission of influenza A virus. Emerg
Infect Dis 12: 1657–1662.
4\. Brankston G, Gitterman L, Hirji Z, Lemieux C, Gardam M (2007) Transmission

2. US-DHHS (2005) HHS Pandemic Influenza Plan. US Department of Health
   and Human Services.

3. Tellier R (2006) Review of aerosol transmission of influenza A virus. Emerg

4. Brankston G, Gitterman L, Hirji Z, Lemieux C, Gardam M (2007) Transmission
   of influenza A in human beings. Lancet Infect Dis 7: 257–265.

5. Roy CJ, Milton DK (2004) Airborne transmission of communicable infection-the


DKM. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: WHD KHC. Wrote
the paper: PF JJM DKM.

Goldfrank LR, Liverman CT (2007) Preparing For An Influenza Pandemic: 23. Huynh KN, Oliver BG, Stelzer S, Rawlinson WD, Tovey ER (2008) A new
Personal Protective Equipment for Healthcare Workers. Washington D.C.: The method for sampling and detection of exhaled respiratory virus aerosols. Clin
Infect Dis 46: 93–95.
US-DHHS (2005) HHS Pandemic Influenza Plan. US Department of Health 24. Couch RB, Cate TR, Douglas RG Jr, Gerone PJ, Knight V (1966) Effect of
route of inoculation on experimental respiratory viral disease in volunteers and
Tellier R (2006) Review of aerosol transmission of influenza A virus. Emerg evidence for airborne transmission. Bacteriol Rev 30: 517–529.
25\. Couch RB, Douglas RG Jr, Lindgren KM, Gerone PJ, Knight V (1970)
Brankston G, Gitterman L, Hirji Z, Lemieux C, Gardam M (2007) Transmission Airborne transmission of respiratory infection with coxsackievirus A type 21.
Am J Epidemiol 91: 78–86.
Roy CJ, Milton DK (2004) Airborne transmission of communicable infection-the 26. Gerone PJ, Couch RB, Keefer GV, Douglas RG, Derrenbacher EB, et al. (1966)
Assessment of experimental and natural viral aerosols. Bacteriol Rev 30:
Fairchild CI, Stampfer JF (1987) Particle concentration in exhaled breath. Am 576–588.
27\. Fennelly KP, Martyny JW, Fulton KE, Orme IM, Cave DM, et al. (2004)
the Cough-generated aerosols of Mycobacterium tuberculosis: a new method to
study infectiousness. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 169: 604–609.
Edwards DA, Man JC, Brand P, Katstra JP, Sommerer K, et al. (2004) Inhaling 28. Downie AW, Meiklejohn M, St Vincent L, Rao AR, Sundara Babu BV, et al.
(1965) The recovery of smallpox virus from patients and their environment in a
Snyder MH, Stephenson EH, Young H, York CG, Tierney EL, et al. (1986) smallpox hospital. Bull World Health Organ 33: 615–622.
Infectivity and antigenicity of live avian-human influenza A reassortant virus: 29. Duguid J (1945) The numbers and the sites of origin of the droplets expelled
comparison of intranasal and aerosol routes in squirrel monkeys. J Infect Dis during expiratory activities. Edinburgh Medical Journal 52: 385–401.
30\. Rudnick SN, Milton DK (2003) Risk of indoor airborne infection transmission
Squires S, Belyavin G (1975) Free contact infection in ferret groups. J Antimicrob estimated from carbon dioxide concentration. Indoor Air 13: 237–245.
31\. Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, et al. (1979) An
Andrewes CH, Glover RE (1941) Spread of infection from the respiratory tract outbreak of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J Epidemiol 110: 1–6.
of 32. Riley E, Murphy G, Riley R (1978) Airborne spread of measles in a suburban
elementary school. Am J Epidemiol 107: 421–432.
Glover RE (1941) Spread of infection from the respiratory tract of the ferret. II. 33. Wells WF (1955) Airborne contagion and air hygiene: an ecological study of
Association of influenza A virus and Streptococcus group C. British Journal of droplet infections. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
34\. Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V (1966) Human influenza resulting
Edward D, Elford W, Laidlaw P (1943a) Studies of air-borne virus infections. I. from aerosol inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 122: 800–804.
and 35. Knight V, Kasel JA, Alford RH, Loda F, Morris JA, et al. (1965) New Research
on Influenza: Studies with Normal Volunteers. Combined Clinical Staff
Loosli CG, Hamre D, Berlin BS (1953) Air-borne influenza virus A infections in Conference at the National Institutes of Health. Ann Intern Med 62:
1307–1325.
Loosli CG, Hertweck MS, Hockwald RS (1970) Airborne influenza PR8-A virus 36. Schweiger B, Zadow I, Heckler R, Timm H, Pauli G (2000) Application of a
fluorogenic PCR assay for typing and subtyping of influenza viruses in
Schulman JL (1967) Experimental transmission of influenza virus infection in respiratory samples. J Clin Microbiol 38: 1552–1558.
and 37. Wei Z, McEvoy M, Razinkov V, Polozova A, Li E, et al. (2007) Biophysical
recovery of airborne virus in the environment of infector mice. J Exp Med 125: characterization of influenza virus subpopulations using field flow fractionation
and multiangle light scattering: correlation of particle counts, size distribution
of and infectivity. J Virol Methods 144: 122–132.
38\. van Elden LJ, Nijhuis M, Schipper P, Schuurman R, van Loon AM (2001)
Schulman JL, Kilbourne ED (1962) Airborne transmission of influenza virus Simultaneous detection of influenza viruses A and B using real-time quantitative
PCR. J Clin Microbiol 39: 196–200.
Maigetter RZ, Ehrlich R, Fenters JD, Gardner DE (1976) Potentiating effects of 39. Douglas R (1975) Influenza in Man. Influenza virus and influenza: Kilbourne.
11: pp 395–445.
40\. Gebhart J, Anselm A, Heyder J, Stahlhofen W (1988) The human lung as
Frankova V (1975) Inhalatory infection of mice with influenza A0/PR8 virus. I. aerosol particle generator. J Aerosol Med 1: 196–197.
The site of primary virus replication and its spread in the respiratory tract. Acta 41. Cowling BJ, Fung RO, Cheng CK, Fang VJ, Chan KH, et al. (2008)
Preliminary findings of a randomized trial of non-pharmaceutical interventions
Lowen AC, Mubareka S, Tumpey TM, Garcia-Sastre A, Palese P (2006) The to prevent influenza transmission in households. PLoS ONE 3: e2101.
guinea pig as a transmission model for human influenza viruses. Proc Natl Acad 42. Lee WM, Grindle K, Pappas T, Marshall DJ, Moser MJ, et al. (2007) Highthroughput, sensitive, and accurate multiplex PCR-microsphere flow cytometry
Lowen AC, Mubareka S, Steel J, Palese P (2007) Influenza virus transmission is system for large-scale comprehensive detection of respiratory viruses. J Clin
Microbiol 45: 2626–2634.

influenza virus infection. Am J Public Health Nations Health 58: 2092–2096.
18\. Schulman JL, Kilbourne ED (1962) Airborne transmission of influenza virus
infection in mice. Nature 195: 1129–1130.
19\. Maigetter RZ, Ehrlich R, Fenters JD, Gardner DE (1976) Potentiating effects of

17. Schulman JL (1968) The use of an animal model to study transmission of
    influenza virus infection. Am J Public Health Nations Health 58: 2092–2096.

18. Schulman JL, Kilbourne ED (1962) Airborne transmission of influenza virus

19. Maigetter RZ, Ehrlich R, Fenters JD, Gardner DE (1976) Potentiating effects of
    manganese dioxide on experimental respiratory infections. Environ Res 11:
    386–391.

20. Frankova V (1975) Inhalatory infection of mice with influenza A0/PR8 virus. I.

21. Lowen AC, Mubareka S, Steel J, Palese P (2007) Influenza virus transmission is
    dependent on relative humidity and temperature. PLoS Pathog 3: 1470–1476.


386–391.
20\. Frankova V (1975) Inhalatory infection of mice with influenza A0/PR8 virus. I.
The site of primary virus replication and its spread in the respiratory tract. Acta
Virol 19: 29–34.

Virol 19: 29–34.
21\. Lowen AC, Mubareka S, Tumpey TM, Garcia-Sastre A, Palese P (2006) The
guinea pig as a transmission model for human influenza viruses. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 103: 9988–9992.
22\. Lowen AC, Mubareka S, Steel J, Palese P (2007) Influenza virus transmission is