Genome Sequencing Shows that European Isolates of
Francisella tularensis Subspecies tularensis Are Almost
Identical to US Laboratory Strain Schu S4

1⁄
Roy R. Chaudhuri, Chuan-Peng Ren1, Leah Desmond2, Gemma A. Vincent2, Nigel J. Silman2, John K. Brehm2, Michael J. Elmore2, Michael J.
5 2,6 1. 2.
Hudson2, Mats Forsman3, Karen E. Isherwood4, Darina Gurycˇova·, Nigel P. Minton, Richard W. Titball4, Mark J. Pallen \*, Richard Vipond

1 Division of Immunity and Infection, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, United Kindgom, 2 Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency
Preparedness and Response, Porton Down, Salisbury, United Kindgom, 3 Department of NBC Analysis, Division of NBC Defence, FOI Swedish Defence
Research Agency, Umea˚, Sweden, 4 Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, United Kindgom, 5 Department of
Epidemiology, Medical Facility, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovak Republic, 6 Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, Institute of Infection, Immunity
and Inflammation, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom

Background. Francisella tularensis causes tularaemia, a life-threatening zoonosis, and has potential as a biowarfare agent. F.
tularensis subsp. tularensis, which causes the most severe form of tularaemia, is usually confined to North America. However,
a handful of isolates from this subspecies was obtained in the 1980s from ticks and mites from Slovakia and Austria. Our aim
was to uncover the origins of these enigmatic European isolates. Methodology/Principal Findings. We determined the
complete genome sequence of FSC198, a European isolate of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis, by whole-genome shotgun
sequencing and compared it to that of the North American laboratory strain Schu S4. Apparent differences between the two
genomes were resolved by re-sequencing discrepant loci in both strains. We found that the genome of FSC198 is almost
identical to that of Schu S4, with only eight SNPs and three VNTR differences between the two sequences. Sequencing of these
loci in two other European isolates of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis confirmed that all three European isolates are also closely
related to, but distinct from Schu S4. Conclusions/Significance. The data presented here suggest that the Schu S4 laboratory
strain is the most likely source of the European isolates of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis and indicate that anthropogenic
activities, such as movement of strains or animal vectors, account for the presence of these isolates in Europe. Given the highly
pathogenic nature of this subspecies, the possibility that it has become established wild in the heartland of Europe carries
significant public health implications.

Citation: Chaudhuri RR, Ren C, Desmond L, Vincent GA, Silman NJ, et al (2007) Genome Sequencing Shows that European Isolates of Francisella
tularensis Subspecies tularensis Are Almost Identical to US Laboratory Strain Schu S4. PLoS ONE 2(4): e352. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000352

INTRODUCTION
Francisella tularensis causes tularaemia, a potentially fatal zoonosis.

Francisella tularensis causes tularaemia, a potentially fatal zoonosis.
Tularaemia is confined to the Northern Hemisphere, where it is
maintained in the environment by rabbits, voles and other small
mammals \[1\]. Human infection most commonly follows a bite
from an arthropod that has acquired the bacterium from an
infected animal. This route leads to glandular or ulceroglandular
tularaemia, which is rarely fatal (,3% mortality). Infection can
also be acquired through ingestion of contaminated food or water.
However, the most serious manifestation of tularaemia, with
a mortality rate of up to 30%, is the respiratory form of the disease,
which is acquired by inhalation of aerosolized bacteria \[2,3\].
Under these circumstances as few as ten bacterial cells are sufficient to establish disease. Infectious aerosols have been generated
by farming activities \[4\] or even by cutting grass \[5,6\].
The molecular basis of Francisella infection remains poorly

Several subspecies of F. tularensis have been identified. F. tularensis
subsp. holarctica (formerly Type B) is found in Europe and Asia, and to
a lesser extent in North America. Several other subspecies,
mediasiatica, novicida and a Japanese variant of holarctica,showrestricted
geographical ranges and play little or no role in human disease \[10\].

The remaining subspecies, F. tularensis subsp. tularensis (formerly Type
A),isthemostvirulentandisusuallyconfinedtoNorthAmerica.
The second F. tularensis genome sequence (GenBank accession

The second F. tularensis genome sequence (GenBank accession
number AM233362) originated from the live vaccine strain,
LVS. This strain was obtained after serial laboratory passage of
a virulent F. tularensis subsp. holarctica isolate \[11\]. The LVS strain
is known to provide protective immunity against tularaemia
\[12,13\]. However, as the mechanisms underlying attenuation and
protection remain unclear, it is no longer licensed for use as
a vaccine in the UK or USA and the search continues for

Funding: This research was funded by the U.K. Department of Health. The
funding sources had no influence upon the study design, collection, analysis and
interpretation of the data, or on the preparation of the manuscript.

- To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: [m.pallen@bham.ac.uk](mailto:m.pallen@bham.ac.uk)

. These authors contributed equally to this work.

¤ Current address: Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom a licensable vaccine against tularaemia \[14\]. Most recently,
analysis of a third F. tularensis genomelike LVS from subspecies
holarcticahas confirmed that there have been extensive genomic
rearrangements since the two subspecies diverged \[15\].
Despite the usual finding that subspecies tularensis is confined to

rearrangements since the two subspecies diverged \[15\].
Despite the usual finding that subspecies tularensis is confined to
North America, several isolates from this subspecies were obtained
from Europe in the 1980s. The first such isolates were recovered in
1986, during a survey of small mammals, fleas, ticks and mites in
western Slovakia \[16\]. These isolates were identified as subspecies
tularensis due to their ability to ferment glycerol and citrulline, high
sensitivity to erythromycin and high virulence; these properties are
typical of subspecies tularensis but not subspecies holarctica. Over the
following two years, isolates of F. tularensis subspecies tularensis were
recovered repeatedly from fleas and mites captured in the region
of the Danube river basin, close to Bratislava.
Two of the isolates of F. tularensis subspecies tularensis that were

Two of the isolates of F. tularensis subspecies tularensis that were
recovered from Slovakia were deposited in the Swedish Defence
Research Agency Francisella culture collection as FSC198 and
FSC199. A further isolate of the same subspecies, Sev-23, was
obtained during a later survey from Ixodes spp. ticks in South East
Austria in 1990 (D. Gurycˇova·, unpublished). We sought to clarify
the relationship between the European isolates of F. tularensis
subspecies tularensis and other members of this subspecies,
particularly the genome-sequenced strain Schu S4, by determining
the complete genome sequence of Slovakian isolate FSC198.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
One hundred and nineteen primer pairs were designed for whole-

MATERIALS AND METHODS
One hundred and nineteen primer pairs were designed for wholethe
genome PCR scanning \[17\], applying GenoFrag \[18\] to the Schu
predictions
S4 genome sequence. Primers pairs were designed to amplify
genome, with features that overlapped SNPs and/or indels adjusted
fragments of about 17 kb that overlapped by around 100 bases.
as necessary. The completed genome sequence has been deposited in
Amplification was performed as previously described \[19\].
EMBL and assigned the accession number AM286280.
For shotgun sequencing, chromosomal DNA from strain

sequence analyzer (Applied Biosystems).
Bases were called from the shotgun traces using Phred \[20,21\].
Obtaining read pairs is not straightforward when using the pLEXX
AK double-insert vector, as the kanamycin cassette that separates the
inserts can religate in either orientation, meaning that reads from the
four primers could be paired in two alternative combinations. To
resolve this ambiguity we adopted a comparative approach, using the
program nucmer from the MUMmer package \[22\] to map the reads
tothegenomesequenceofSchuS4.Oneofthecombinationswas
considered correct if the sequences from at least one of the potential
primer pairs could be unambiguously placed in positions consistent
with pairing (on opposite strands within 3 kb of each other), and the
same was not true of the alternate combination. A large proportion of
read pairs could be determined in this way, the remainder were
treated as unpaired reads during the assembly process.
Assembly was performed using two comparative methods. The
first used the AMOScmp pipeline \[23\], a comparative approach

following this initial process. Manual inspection and refinement of
the assembly was performed using Consed \[24\]. Finishing was
performed by a series of gap-closing PCRs, with primers designed
using Primer3 \[25\] via a BioPerl \[26\] interface. A final assembly
was obtained using AMOScmp. Reads from repetitive regions that
could not be unambiguously placed based on their sequence or
pairing information were randomly distributed between the copies of
the repeat. To confirm the sequence of these repetitive regions, each
was separately amplified and re-sequenced. The large repeat regions
within the genome (two copies of the 33.9 kb pathogenicity island,
together with three copies of a ,3 kb repeat region consisting of
a gene with no known homologues, flanked by an ISFtu1 element
and an ISFtu2 element) were resolved by long PCR amplification of
the entire repeats (using two overlapping long PCRs in the case of the
33.9 kb islands). Fragments from within the long PCR products were
amplified, sequenced and assembled using Phrap to unambiguously
determine the sequence of each repeat.
Upon final assembly, whole genome comparison of FSC198 and

determine the sequence of each repeat.
Upon final assembly, whole genome comparison of FSC198 and
Schu S4 was performed using the run-mummer3 component of
MUMmer version 3.0 \[22,27\], and visualized using ACT \[28\]. For
further analysis an online comparative genomics database, FtBASE
( [http://ft.bham.ac.uk](http://ft.bham.ac.uk/)), was developed based on the xBASE \[29\]
template. As only a small number of differences were identified
between the two sequences, all relevant regions were PCR-amplified
and re-sequenced in both the FSC198 and Schu S4 genomes, to
determine if the differences were real or artefacts introduced during
the sequencing, base-calling or assembly process.
Given the similarity of the two sequences, a fresh annotation of

the sequencing, base-calling or assembly process.
Given the similarity of the two sequences, a fresh annotation of
the FSC198 genome was deemed unnecessary. Instead, gene
predictions and annotation were transferred from the Schu S4
genome, with features that overlapped SNPs and/or indels adjusted
as necessary. The completed genome sequence has been deposited in
EMBL and assigned the accession number AM286280.
To examine the diversity of the European subspecies tularensis

RESULTS
All but two of 119 primer pairs patterned on the Schu S4 genome
sequence yielded appropriately sized fragments when applied to
DNA from FSC198 in whole-genome long PCR scanning. This
confirmed that the genomes are essentially co-linear. Subsequent
determination of the complete genome sequence of FSC198
showed, surprisingly, that it was almost identical to that of Schu S4
(Figure 1). Although our initial analysis of the completed FSC198
genome sequence suggested that SchuS4 and FSC198 differed at
forty SNPs (Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms) and five VNTR loci,
the majority of these apparent discrepancies were confirmed as
errors in the published Schu S4 sequence rather than genuine
differences (see Table S1). Our final analysis revealed just eight SNPs
and three VNTR differences between the two genomes (Table 1).
The presence of identical residues at all eight SNP loci in Schu

RESULTS

* * *

Figure 1. Circular representation of the complete genome sequence of FSC198. Predicted coding sequences are colored according to their GC
content. The inner circle indicates the positions of SNPs (red) and VNTR differences (blue) relative to the published Schu S4 genome sequence. SNP
and VNTR loci are numbered as in table 1.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000352.g001

virulent subspecies is confined to North America \[16\]. We thus
decided to investigate one of these isolates by genome sequencing.
While genome sequencing was underway, an analysis of VNTR

Table 1. SNPs and VNTR differences between the FSC198 and Schu S4 genome sequence.

Data from equivalent loci in strains FSC199, Sev-23 and LVS are also shown. Schu S4-like ancestral character states are highlighted in bold; FSC198-like character states in
italics. VNTR loci are numbered as in reference 19; the data indicate the number of copies of the repeat unit.
.................................................................doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000352.t001

| Region of difference | Schu S4 coordinate | FSC 198 coordinate | Schu S4 (USA) | FSC198 (Slovakia) | FSC199 (Slovakia) | Sev-23(Austria) | LVS(subsp. holarctica) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| S1 | 390291 | 390243 | C | T | T | T | C |
| S2 | 621878 | 621830 | C | T | C | C | C |
| S3 | 639511 | 639463 | C | A | C | C | C |
| S4 | 701628 | 701580 | G | T | T | T | G |
| S5 | 911511 | 911463 | C | T | T | T | C |
| S6 | 1007564 | 1007516 | G | C | G | G | G |
| S7 | 1008149 | 1008101 | G | A | G | G | G |
| S8 | 1134418 | 1134369 | G | A | G | G | G |
| M8 | 8266 | 8266 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 2 |
| M3 | 308635 | 308650 | 21 | 14 | 25 | 28 | 13 |
| M10 | 1283659 | 1283610 | 18 | 11 | 11 | 10 | 2 |

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000352.t001 sub-species into two clades, A.I and A.II, each of which in turn
shows notable diversity. This study also established that the
European isolates fall within the A.I sub-population, which is
found predominantly in the American mid-West \[30,31\].

found predominantly in the American
However, surprisingly, this study
isolates are the closest relatives of the laboratory strain Schu S4
\[30\], far closer to it than any other isolates from the mid-West or
elsewhere in North America. The complete genome sequence of
strain FSC198 that we describe here extends the conclusion from
the earlier study, showing that FSC198 is almost identical to the
previously sequenced Schu S4 strain.
What is the explanation for this

American mid-West \[30,31\].
showed that the European
isolates are the closest relatives of the laboratory strain Schu S4
\[30\], far closer to it than any other isolates from the mid-West or
elsewhere in North America. The complete genome sequence of
strain FSC198 that we describe here extends the conclusion from
the earlier study, showing that FSC198 is almost identical to the
previously sequenced Schu S4 strain.
this close relationship between

previously sequenced Schu S4 strain.
What is the explanation for this close relationship between
FSC198 and SchuS4? One possibility is that it reflects anthropogenic transfer of a naturally occurring representative of the A.I
sub-population from the American Mid-West to central Europe.
In support of this idea, Farlow et al. \[31\] recently suggested two
potential modes of spread of for the A.I clade within the
continental USA: (a) the transport of dogs, and, with them
Francisella-infected dog fleas, as an explanation for the spread of the
A.I sub-population from the central USA to California and (b) the
deliberate mass introduction of cotton-tailed rabbits for sporting
purposes as the cause of the spread of tularaemia to New England.
Both modes of spread might account for the transit of A.I strains to
Europe, particularly now that wild populations of Eastern
cottontails (Sylvilagus floridanus) have become established in several
parts of Europe \[32\]. However, previously published VNTR
results plus the data presented in Table 1 suggest that this
possibility is unlikely. Were a wild relative of Schu S4 to be the
progenitor of the European strains, it would be expected to differ
at some positions from Schu S4. Since there are no SNPs that are
specific to Schu S4, we conclude that it most likely represents the
immediate precursor of the European strains.
This conclusion suggests an alternative hypothesis, that FSC198

REFERENCES

This conclusion suggests an alternative hypothesis, that FSC198
and the other European subspecies tularensis strains are derived
from a laboratory stock of Schu S4, a widely disseminated model
strain. This notion is supported by the near identity of the FSC198
and Schu S4 genome sequences and by the evidence from VNTR
typing, which identifies Schu S4 as the closest relative of the
European isolates. Although one cannot completely discount the
potential for laboratory error in strain propagation, the fact that
the three European isolates are distinct from each another and
were obtained at different times suggests that they are unlikely to
have arisen from repeated laboratory contamination from a single
stock of Schu S4. The possibility of repeated contamination with
related isolates generated by subculturing remains, but is in our
opinion unlikely. An alternate possibility is that the strains
represent genuine examples of a wild population of Schu S4-like
bacteria. If this population is derived from Schu S4, the most likely
explanation is inadvertent contamination of the environment with
laboratory-derived bacteria. Such contamination could be the
consequence of disposal of laboratory waste or could even result
from escape of mammals or arthropods that have been infected in
the laboratory in North America, or in Europe.

All the SNPs in the FSC198 genome occur within proteincoding regions and all are non-synonymous. This hints at the
possibility of positive selection driving adaptation to a new
environment, whether replication in the laboratory or survival in
a new environmental niche in Europe. Interestingly, two of the
SNPs were identified within the same gene, ybhO, which encodes
a cardiolipin synthetase. Knockout mutations within a homologous
gene from E. coli, cls, result in increased doubling times, a lower
final cell density, a loss of viability in stationary phase, and several
other pleiotropic effects \[33\]. It is therefore conceivable that
changes in the sequence of the equivalent gene in F. tularensis could
confer a selective advantage under certain conditions.
The data presented here suggest that the Schu S4 laboratory

1. Ellis J, Oyston PC, Green M, Titball RW (2002) Tularaemia. Clin Microbiol
   Rev 15: 631646.

2. Dienst FT Jr (1963) Tularaemia: a perusal of three hundred thirty-nine cases.

3. Dienst FT Jr (1963) Tularaemia: a perusal of three hundred thirty-nine cases.
   J La State Med Soc 115: 114127.

4. Riley RL, Mills CC, Nyka W, Weinstock N, Storey PB, et al. (1959) Aerial

5. Riley RL, Mills CC, Nyka W, Weinstock N, Storey PB, et al. (1959) Aerial
   dissemination of pulmonary tuberculosis. A two-year study of contagion in
   a tuberculosis ward. Am J Epidemiol 70: 185196.

6. Syrjala H, Kujala P, Myllyla V, Salminen A (1985) Airborne transmission of

7. Syrjala H, Kujala P, Myllyla V, Salminen A (1985) Airborne transmission of
   tularaemia in farmers. Scand J Infect Dis 17: 371375.


confer a selective advantage under certain conditions.
The data presented here suggest that the Schu S4 laboratory
strain is the most likely source of the reported European isolates of
F. tularensis subspecies tularensis and indicate that anthropogenic
activities, such as movement of strains or animal vectors, account
for the presence of these isolates in Europe. Given the highly
pathogenic nature of this subspecies, the possibility that it has
become established wild in the heartland of Europe carries
significant public health implications. We suggest that the threat
posed by this hazardous organism requires further environmental
sampling to assess the distribution and prevalence of this
subspecies in Europe.
Further more detailed epidemiological studies on other A.I

5. Feldman KA, Stiles-Enos D, Julian K, Matyas BT, Telford SR 3rd, et al. (2003)
   Tularaemia on Marthas Vineyard: seroprevalence and occupational risk. Emerg
   Infect Dis 9: 350354.
6. Feldman KA, Enscore RE, Lathrop SL, Matyas BT, McGuill M, et al. (2001) An
   Outbreak of Primary Pneumonic Tularaemia on Marthas Vineyard.
   N Engl J Med 345: 16011606.
7. Larsson P, Oyston PC, Chain P, Chu MC, Duffield M, et al. (2005) The
   complete genome sequence of Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of
   tularaemia. Nat Genet 37: 153159.

subspecies in Europe.
Further more detailed epidemiological studies on other A.I
strains, such as SNP discovery and even additional genome
sequencing, will be required to establish beyond all doubt whether
SchuS4 is indeed the progenitor of FSC198, or whether transfer of
a naturally occurring close relative of SchuS4 might account for
these findings. Nonetheless, this study provides a salient example
of the utility of bacterial whole-genome sequencing for the
purposes of public health epidemiology and also presents the first
publicly available bacterial genome sequence to be determined in
the United Kingdom outside of the Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute. The establishment of an independent bacterial-genomesequencing facility within the Health Protection Agency will prove
an invaluable resource in monitoring and preventing infectious
disease within the United Kingdom.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Table S1 Differences between Schu S4 and FSC198 that are
attributable to sequencing errors in the published Schu S4 genome
sequence.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000352.s001 (0.05 MB

Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000352.s001 (0.05 MB
DOC)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Conceived and designed the experiments: MP NM RT RC DL NS JB MH
RV LD Rw. Performed the experiments: RC CR DL GV KI RV LD Rw.
Analyzed the data: MP RC ME RV Rw. Contributed reagents/materials/
analysis tools: MF DG DG. Wrote the paper: MP RT RC RV Rw.

Author Contributions

* * *

8. Hesselbrock W, Foshay L (1945) The Morphology of Bacterium tularense.
   J Bacteriol 49: 209231.

9. Eigelsbach HT, Braun W, Herring RD (1951) Studies on the variation of

10. Eigelsbach HT, Braun W, Herring RD (1951) Studies on the variation of
   Bacterium tularense. J Bacteriol 61: 557569.

11. Whipp MJ, Davis JM, Lum G, de Boer J, Zhou Y, et al. (2003) Characterization

12. Eigelsbach HT, Downs CM (1961) Prophylactic effectiveness of live and killed
   tularaemia vaccines. I. Production of vaccine and evaluation in the white mouse
   and guinea pig. J Immunol 87: 415425.

13. Tarnvik A (1989) Nature of protective immunity to Francisella tularensis. Rev

14. Tarnvik A (1989) Nature of protective immunity to Francisella tularensis. Rev


Infect Dis 11: 440451.
13\. Sandstrom G (1994) The tularaemia vaccine. J Chem Technol Biotechnol 59:

20. Ewing B, Green P (1998) Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using
    phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res 8: 186194.

21. Ewing B, Hillier L, Wendl MC, Green P (1998) Base-calling of automated
    sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res 8: 175185.

22. Delcher AL, Phillippy A, Carlton J, Salzberg SL (2002) Fast algorithms for largescale genome alignment and comparison. Nucleic Acids Res 30: 24782483.

23. Pop M, Phillippy A, Delcher AL, Salzberg SL (2004) Comparative genome
    assembly. Brief Bioinform 5: 237248.

24. Gordon D, Abajian C, Green P (1998) Consed: a graphical tool for sequence
    finishing. Genome Res 8: 195202.

25. Rozen S, Skaletsky H (2000) Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for
    biologist programmers. Methods Mol Biol 132: 365386.

26. Stajich JE, Block D, Boulez K, Brenner SE, Chervitz SA, et al. (2002) The
    Bioperl toolkit: Perl modules for the life sciences. Genome Res 12: 16111618.

27. Kurtz S, Phillippy A, Delcher AL, Smoot M, Shumway M, et al. (2004) Versatile
    and open software for comparing large genomes. Genome Biol 5: R12.

28. Carver TJ, Rutherford KM, Berriman M, Rajandream MA, Barrell BG, et al.
    (2005) ACT: the Artemis Comparison Tool. Bioinformatics 21: 34223423.

29. Chaudhuri RR, Pallen MJ (2006) xBASE, a collection of online databases for
    bacterial comparative genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 34: D335337.

30. Johansson A, Farlow J, Larsson P, Dukerich M, Chambers E, et al. (2004)
    Worldwide genetic relationships among Francisella tularensis isolates determined
    by multiple-locus variable-number tandem repeat analysis. J Bacteriol 186:

32. Farlow J, Wagner DM, Dukerich M, Stanley M, Chu M, et al. (2005) Francisella
    tularensis in the United States. Emerg Infect Dis 11: 18351841.

33. Directorate of Culture and Cultural and Natural Heritage CoE. Bern
    Convention action on invasive alien species in Europe; 2001; Montre·al.

34. Tropp BE (1997) Cardiolipin synthase from Escherichia coli. Biochim Biophys
    Acta 1348: 192200.

35. Sandstrom G (1994) The tularaemia vaccine. J Chem Technol Biotechnol 59:

37. Oyston PC, Sjostedt A, Titball RW (2004) Tularaemia: bioterrorism defence

38. Petrosino JF, Xiang Q, Karpathy SE, Jiang H, Yerrapragada S, et al. (2006)
    Chromosome rearrangement and diversification of Francisella tularensis
    revealed by the type B (OSU18) genome sequence. J Bacteriol 188: 69776985.

39. Gurycova D (1998) First isolation of Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis in


revealed by the type B (OSU18) genome sequence. J Bacteriol 188: 69776985.
16\. Gurycova D (1998) First isolation of Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis in
Europe. Eur J Epidemiol 14: 797802.
17\. Ohnishi M, Terajima J, Kurokawa K, Nakayama K, Murata T, et al. (2002)

Europe. Eur J Epidemiol 14: 797802.
17\. Ohnishi M, Terajima J, Kurokawa K, Nakayama K, Murata T, et al. (2002)
Genomic diversity of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157 revealed by whole
genome PCR scanning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99: 1704317048.
18\. Ben Zakour N, Gautier M, Andonov R, Lavenier D, Cochet MF, et al. (2004)

18. Ben Zakour N, Gautier M, Andonov R, Lavenier D, Cochet MF, et al. (2004)
    GenoFrag: software to design primers optimized for whole genome scanning by
    long-range PCR amplification. Nucleic Acids Res 32: 1724.
19. Ren CP, Chaudhuri RR, Fivian A, Bailey CM, Antonio M, et al. (2004) The