Impact of introducing fluorescent microscopy
on hospital tuberculosis control: A beforeafter study at a high caseload medical center
in Taiwan

RESEARCH ARTICLE

1,2 2,3
Hsin-Yun Sun, Jann-Yuan Wang2, Yee-Chun Chen2, Po-Ren Hsueh, Yi-Hsuan Chen1,
1,2 2,4,5
Yu-Chung ChuangID2, Chi-Tai FangID \*, Shan-Chwen Chang2, Jung-Der WangID

Data Availability Statement: All relevant data are
within the manuscript and its Supporting
Information files.

1 Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 2 Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 3 Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 4 Departments of
Internal Medicine and Occupational and Environmental Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
Tainan, Taiwan, 5 Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan

OPEN ACCESS

Citation: Sun H-Y, Wang J-Y, Chen Y-C, Hsueh P-
R, Chen Y-H, Chuang Y-C, et al. (2020) Impact of
introducing fluorescent microscopy on hospital
tuberculosis control: A before-after study at a high
caseload medical center in Taiwan. PLoS ONE 15
(4): e0230067. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal).
pone.0230067

Editor: Frederick Quinn, The University of Georgia,
UNITED STATES

Accepted: February 20, 2020

- [fangct@ntu.edu.tw](mailto:fangct@ntu.edu.tw)

Abstract

Undiagnosed tuberculosis (TB) patients hospitalized because of comorbidities constitute a
challenge to TB control in hospitals. We aimed to assess the impact of introducing highly
sensitive fluorescent microscopy for examining sputum smear to replace conventional
microscopy under a high TB risk setting.

Background

We measured the impact of switch to fluorescent microscopy on the smear detection rate of
culture-confirmed pulmonary TB, timing of respiratory isolation, and total non-isolated infectious person-days in hospital at a high-caseload medical center (approximately 400 TB
cases annually) in Taipei. Multivariable Cox regression was applied to adjust for effects of
covariates. The effect attributable to the improved smear detection rate was determined
using causal mediation analysis.

Methods

* * *

Funding: J Wang: Department of Health, Executive
Yuan, Taiwan (DOH92-HP-1801 and DOH94-HP-
1801). Y Chen: Ministry of Health and Welfare,
Executive Yuan, Taiwan (MOHW108-TDU-B-211-
133002) and (MOHW109-TDU-B-211-114002). C
Fang: The financial support provided by Infectious
Diseases Research and Education Center, Ministry
of Health and Welfare and National Taiwan
University. The funders had no role in study
design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

isolated infectious patient-days in hospital decreased by 69% (from 4,778 patient-days per
year to 1,502 patient-days per year).

Conclusions

In a high TB caseload setting, highly sensitive rapid diagnostic tools could substantially
improve timing of respiratory isolation and reduce the risk of nosocomial TB transmission.

Introduction

Pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) is an airborne disease \[1\]. Unless promptly isolated, hospitalized
patients with active pulmonary TB can transmit to both healthcare workers (HCWs) and other
patients \[2\]. HCWs could have an incidence rate of active TB 2- to 20-fold higher than that in
general population \[3\]. The discovery of hospital-acquired extensively drug-resistant TB, with
an extremely high mortality among HIV-positive patients, further highlights this deadly hazard \[4, 5\]. Rapid isolation of hospitalized patients with pulmonary TB is the pivotal step to prevent nosocomial transmission \[6\]. However, undiagnosed TB patients hospitalized for
treatment of comorbidities constitute a challenge to TB control within hospitals.
Clinical predictive rules had been proposed to guide the decision to implement respiratory

Clinical predictive rules had been proposed to guide the decision to implement respiratory
isolation \[7\]. An expanded isolation policy which pre-emptively isolated all patients with possibility of TB achieved immediate isolation of >95% of patients with TB in low TB risk settings
\[8\]. Nevertheless, the same policy would be impractical in a high TB risk setting because there
would be too many patients to be pre-emptively isolated \[9, 10\]. For a laboratory diagnosisbased respiratory isolation policy, an important barrier is the limited sensitivity of conventional sputum smear \[11, 12\]. Compared with conventional microscopy, fluorescence microscopy has a superior sensitivity for detecting TB bacilli \[13\]. In 2011, World Health
Organization (WHO) recommends switching conventional to fluorescence microscopy \[14\],
under the condition that the switch should be carefully planned at country level with training,
quality assurance, and monitoring on TB detection rate \[14\]. WHO also endorsed highly sensitive TB nucleic acid amplification test (TB-PCR) such as Xpert1 MTB/RIF (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA) \[15\]. Point-of-care Xpert1 MTB/RIF reduces all-cause 12-month mortality in
patients positive for TB symptoms at the time of HIV diagnosis \[16\]. Nevertheless, to our
knowledge, the effect of introducing these more sensitive diagnostic tools on reducing risk of
nosocomial TB transmission has not been documented.
Taiwan is a developed country with an incidence of TB at the range of approximately 70 per

Taiwan is a developed country with an incidence of TB at the range of approximately 70 per
100,000 general population in 2001 \[17\]. In 2003, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-
related chest radiograph screenings led to the discovery of a large nosocomial TB outbreak at a
rehabilitation facility in Taipei, involving 65 cases of active TB in HCWs \[18\]. The index case
of this outbreak was an elderly patient hospitalized for stroke rehabilitation without suspicion
of TB \[18\]. Subsequent investigations found that the problem of delayed isolation of undiagnosed TB patients also existed in other hospitals \[19, 20\]. In response, Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (CDC) issued guidance on nosocomial TB control \[21\]. To facilitate laboratory
diagnosis-based isolation, Medical Center A started to roll out auramine-rhodamine staining
with fluorescence microscopy since 2006 and completed the switch by early 2010s. We aimed
to assess whether switching from conventional microscopy to a more sensitive rapid diagnostic
tool improves early detection and prompt isolation of hospitalized patients with undiagnosed
TB.

* * *

Methods

Setting

Medical Center A, a leading university-affiliated general hospital having the second-highest
TB caseload (approximately 400 cases annually) in Taiwan, was chosen for this study. The center in Taipei had a 2,200-bed capacity and provided both primary and tertiary referral care
reimbursed by National Health Insurance (NHI). The service amount steadily increased from
2001 to 2014. There were 3,454,724 outpatient visits and 91,645 admissions in 2014, nearly
2-fold than that in 2001. Medical Center A followed the guidance on hospital respiratory isolation policies issued by Taiwan CDC \[21\]. Contact investigation had been expanded to all
HCWs who were exposed to TB patients since 2004. Sputum smear auramine-rhodamine
staining with fluorescent microscopy started in 2006. The national laboratory personnel training programs for quality assurance of acid-fast staining \[21\], mandated by Taiwan CDC,
helped to ensure the technical proficiency and performance quality of fluorescence microscopy
(see details in S1 Table) \[22\].

Study design

This before-after retrospective cohort study included all hospitalized patients with cultureconfirmed pulmonary TB in 25 wards/units in 2001 and those in 2014. We compared the duration from admission/arrival to respiratory isolation in 2001 (conventional microscopy with
Ziehl-Neelsen staining, represented the baseline situation before 2003 SARS outbreak) with
that in 2014 (after full switching to fluorescent microscopy with auramine-rhodamine staining
and the quality assurance program). Cox regression was used to adjust for effects of covariates.
the effect mediated by improved smear detection rate was precisely identity using causal mediation analysis. The study procedure and exemption of informed consent were reviewed and
approved by Research Ethics Committee of National Taiwan University Hospital (Taipei,
Taiwan).

Hospitalized patients had typical presentations of pulmonary TB if they had: (a) a prolonged
cough for >3 weeks; (b) clinical suspicion of pulmonary TB based on chest radiography, such
as cavitary pulmonary lesions, upper lobe diseases, or miliary lesions; or (c) already received a
confirmed diagnosis of pulmonary TB by a positive sputum culture of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, positive acid-fast stain (AFS), or positive TB PCR, before the hospitalization. The hospitalization was considered as TB-related if the chief complaint suggested an infectious etiology
or the admission was for inpatient TB treatment. The hospitalization was considered comorbidities-related when the patients was admitted for management of acute complications of
non-infectious diseases, such as myocardial infarction, pulmonary edema, malignancy, or
acute exacerbation of chronic lung diseases.

Definitions

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Impact of fluorescent microscopy on hospital tuberculosis control

## Identification of TB cases

We retrospectively identified all cases of culture-confirmed pulmonary TB patients in 2001 (January 1 to December 31, 2001) and in 2014 (January 1 to December 31, 2014), using a com- puterized registry of Mycobacteriology Laboratory. The diagnosis was verified in each case with review of medical records.

## Time to respiratory isolation

For each included infectious TB case, the zero time was the date of admission to the hospital or the date of arrival to emergency department (ER). The end of follow-up was the date when the patients was sent to a respiratory isolation room (event), the date of discharge (from hospital or ER) before respiratory isolation can be implemented (censored), the date of completion 14-day anti-TB treatment (censored), or the date of mortality due to any cause (censored). For patients who had multiple admissions or multiple positive sputum cultures, only the admission with or following the first positive sputum culture (the index culture) was used to calculate the Kaplan-Meier estimates for time to respiratory isolation.

## Total non-isolated infectious patient-days in hospital

To estimate the total non-isolated infectious patient-days in hospital, each TB case/patient was considered infectious from 3 months prior to the first positive sputum culture unless being put in a respiratory isolation room or had already received a 14-day course of at least two in vitro active anti-tuberculous agents after the last positive sputum culture. For those who had multi- ple hospitalization or had ever been transferred between wards/units before being diagnosed with pulmonary TB or adequately treated, all hospitalizations or stay in each ward/unit were counted in the calculation of total infectious patient-days.

## Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 21.0 (IBM, Armonk, New York, USA). Cox regression, with backward selection, was used to adjust for covariates. Causal mediation analy- ses were performed using proc causalmed (based on logistic regression for isolation status on day 7) in SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA). All analyses were two-sided. P values less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

**Results**

## Time to respiratory isolation: 2001 vs. 2014

In 2001 and 2014, 180 of 403 (45%) and 81 of 301 (27%) patients with culture-confirmed pul- monary TB were hospitalized, respectively (Table 1). The median non-isolated infectious dura- tion decreased from 12.5 in 2001 to 3 days in 2014 (P<0.001) (Table 1). Improvement occurred over all subgroups of patients (S2 Table). Fig 1 shows Kaplan-Meier estimates for time to respiratory isolation (discharge of undiagnosed TB is counted as censored rather than as the end of infectiousness) in 2001 versus that in 2014 (median: 46 vs. 19 days, p = 0.028, log- rank test). Patients with cavitary lung lesions were more quickly isolated, while lack of typical clinical presentation and hospitalized due to comorbidities were associated with delayed respi- ratory isolation (Table 2). After adjusting for patient characteristics, TB patients in 2014 were more quickly isolated than those in 2001 (adjusted hazard ratio \[aHR\] 4.7, 95% confidence interval \[CI\] 2.7–8.2, P<0.001) (Table 2: Model 1).

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067) April 3, 2020 4 / 14

* * *

Table 1. Characteristics of hospitalized patients with culture-confirmed pulmonary tuberculosis.

| Variables | 2001 | 2014 | P value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Number of patients | 180 | 81 |  |
| Age(years),mean(SD) | 63.0(20.7) | 66.1(19.8) | 0.271 |
| Men,n(%) | 126(70.0) | 60(74.1) | 0.501 |
| Positive sputum smear,N(%) | 41(22.8) | 39(48.1) | <0.001 |
| SputumTB-PCR performed,n/N(%) | 4/41(9.8) | 37/39(94.9) | <0.001 |
| Negative sputum smear,N(%) | 139(77.2) | 42(51.9) | <0.001 |
| SputumTB-PCR performed,n/N(%) | 25/139(18.0) | 8/42(19.0) | 0.876 |
| Available sputumTB PCR data,N(%) | 29(16.1) | 45(55.6) | <0.001 |
| Positive TB-PCR,n/N(%) | 14/29(48.3) | 40/45(88.9) | <0.001 |
| Patients with cavitary pulmonary lesions,n(%) | 30(16.8)a | 11(13.6) | 0.515 |
| Positive sputum smear,%(n/N) | 43.3(13/30) | 81.8(9/11) | 0.029 |
| Patients with non-cavitary pulmonary lesions,n(%) | 149(83.2)a | 70(86.4) | 0.515 |
| Positive sputum smear,%(n/N) | 28(18.8) | 30(42.9) | <0.001 |
| Patients without typical presentations,n(%) | 119(66.1) | 48(59.3) | 0.286 |
| Positive sputum smear,%(n/N) | 14.3(17/119) | 27.1(13/48) | 0.051 |
| Hospitalization due to comorbidity,n(%) | 69(38.3) | 31(38.3) | 0.992 |
| Positive sputum smear,%(n/N) | 14.5(10/69) | 25.8(8/31) | 0.173 |
| Non-chest/ID specialty attending doctors,n(%) | 124(68.9) | 57(70.4) | 0.810 |
| Fluoroquinolone exposure within 6 months,n(%) | 32(17.8) | 16(19.8) | 0.703 |
| Underlying diseases,n(%) |  |  |  |
| Hypertension | 52(28.9) | 28(34.6) | 0.357 |
| Diabetes mellitus | 39(21.7) | 26(32.1) | 0.071 |
| Malignancy | 45(25.0) | 17(21.0) | 0.481 |
| Chronic lung disease | 53(29.4) | 6(7.4) | <0.001 |
| Chronic kidney disease | 9(5.0) | 3(3.7) | 0.886 |
| Congestive heart failure | 9(5.0) | 4(4.9) | 0.983 |
| Liver cirrhosis | 8(4.4) | 1(1.2) | 0.343 |
| Transplantation | 4(2.2) | 2(2.5) | 0.903 |
| HIV infection | 1(0.6) | 1(1.2) | 0.525 |
| Immediate respiratory isolationb,n(%) | 11(6.1) | 23(28.4) | <0.001 |
| Non-isolated infectious duration, median(IQR),days | 12.5(6.8-28.3)days | 3.0(0-8.0)days | .<0.001c |

P values are based on chi-square test or Fisher exact test unless specified otherwise. ID: infectious diseases; NA: not
available
a

a
One patient in 2001 did not have chest radiography available
b
Immediate respiratory isolation was defined as respiratory isolation on the date of admission or arrival of the

Switching to auramine-rhodamine staining with fluorescent microscopy doubled the overall
positive sputum smear rate from 22.8% (2001) to 48.1% (2014) (P<0.001), particularly in
patients with non-cavitary lung lesions (18.8% to 42.9%, P<0.001) (Table 1). Cox regression
analyses shows that a positive sputum smear was associated with an earlier respiratory isolation (aHR 3.2, 95% CI 2.1–4.9, P<0.001) (Table 2: Model 2). Causal mediation analyses show
that the two-fold higher sputum smear detection rate of fluorescence microscopy doubled the

b
Immediate respiratory isolation was defined as respiratory isolation on the date of admission or arrival of the
emergent room.
c
Log-rank test

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067.t001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067.t001)

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Impact of fluorescent microscopy on hospital tuberculosis control

**Fig 1. Kaplan-Meier estimates for time to respiratory isolation of hospitalized patients with tuberculosis, 2001 vs. 2014.**

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067.g001](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067.g001)

likelihood of early respiratory isolation (odds ratio \[OR\] for natural indirect effect mediated by improved sputum smear detection rate: 1.8, 95%CI 1.3–2.5, P<0.001) (Fig 2).

## Effect of TB-PCR

In patients with positive sputum smear, the use of TB-PCR grew from 9.8% (2001) to 94.9% (2014) (P<0.001); however, in patients with negative sputum smear, the use of TB-PCR remained infrequent (18.0% \[2001\] vs. 19.0% \[2014\], P = 0.876) (Table 1). In Cox regression analysis, TB-PCR testing was also helpful for early respiratory isolation (aHR 1.5, 95% CI

0.9–2.4, P = 0.094) but the effect of TB-PCR did not reach statistical significance (Table 2: Model 2).

## Physicians alertness

Alertness of physicians, measured by duration from patient arrival to physician’s ordering of smear or culture, also improved from 2001 to 2014 (median: 5 vs. 2 days, P<0.001) (S2 Table). Cox regression analysis shows that physician alertness was also associated with earlier respira- tory isolation (aHR 0.98 for each additional day before physician ordering TB smear/culture, 95% CI 0.96–0.99, P = 0.004) (Table 2: Model 3). Causal mediation analyses showed that improved physician alertness increased the likelihood of early respiratory isolation by 1.3-fold

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067) April 3, 2020 6 / 14

* * *

Table 2. Factors associated with prompt respiratory isolation (Model 1: 2014 vs. 2001; Model 2: The effects of positive sputum acid-fast smear and TB-PCR; Model
3: The effect of physician alertness).

|  | Univariable analysis |  | Multivariable analysis |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Variables | HR(95%CI) | Pvalue | aHR(95%CI)(Model 1) | Pvalue | aHR(95%CI)(Model2) | Pvalue | aHR(95%CI)(Model3)^{a}$ | Pvalue |
| 2014 vs.2001 | 2.4(1.6-3.6) | <0.001 | 4.7(2.7-8.2) | <0.001 | 2.0(1.2-3.4) | 0.006 | 2.7(1.7-4.3) | <0.001 |
| Men vs.Women | 0.9(0.6-1.3) | 0.578 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Cavitary lung lesions | 2.8(1.9-4.1) | <0.001 | 2.0(1.3-3.1) | 0.001 | 1.7(1.1-2.6) | 0.022 | 1.8(1.2-2.9) | 0.007 |
| Positive sputum smear | 5.5(3.8-8.0) | <0.001 |  |  | 3.2(2.1-4.9) | <0.001 | 3.6(2.3-5.5) | <0.001 |
| Sputum TB-PCR test |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Done vs.Not done | 0.3(0.2-0.5) | <0.001 |  |  | 1.5(0.9-2.4) | 0.094 |  |  |
| Duration from hospital visits to the date of index culture(days) | 0.96(0.94-0.98) | <0.001 |  |  |  |  | 0.98(0.96-0.99) | 0.004 |
| Lack of typical clinical presentations | 0.2(0.2-0.3) | <0.001 | 0.4(0.2-0.6) | <0.001 | 0.3(0.2-0.5) | <0.001 | 0.3(0.2-0.5) | <0.001 |
| Fluoroquinolone use | 0.8(0.5-1.2) | 0.239 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Hospitalization for comorbidities | 0.4(0.3-0.6) | <0.001 | 0.5(0.3-0.7) | <0.001 | 0.6(0.4-0.9) | 0.025 |  |  |
| Physician speciality |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Chest/IDvs.Others | 1.4(1.0-2.1) | 0.055 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Cancer | 0.5(0.3-0.9) | 0.009 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Transplant recipients | 0.4(0.1-1.5) | 0.153 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Chronic kidney disease | 1.2(0.5-2.8) | 0.601 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Diabetes mellitus | 1.0(0.7-1.5) | 0.952 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Chronic lung diseases | 1.2(0.8-1.8) | 0.461 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Liver cirrhosis | 0.3(0.1-1.2) | 0.084 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Congestive heart failure | 0.5(0.2-1.3) | 0.177 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Hypertension | 1.1(0.8-1.7) | 0.484 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| HIV infection | 1.6(0.2-11.4) | 0.644 |  |  |  |  |  |  |

HR, hazard ratio; aHR, adjusted hazard ratio
a

a
Because some patients already received medical order of smear/culture at outpatient clinics, Model 3 was restricted to those who had not been suspected to have TB at
admission. Only patients who had their index cultures sent after hospital visits were included for Model 3. Thus, 169 (93.9%) patients in 2001 and 73 (90.1%) in 2014
had their index cultures sent after their hospital visits (p = 0.307).

(OR for natural indirect effect mediated by early ordering of smear/culture: 1.3, 95% CI 1.02–
1.5, P<0.001) (S1 Fig).

Total non-isolated infectious patient-days per year

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Impact of fluorescent microscopy on hospital tuberculosis control

**Fig 2. Causal mediation analyses of the effect attributable to switching from conventional to fluorescence**

**microscopy. Abbreviations: Year of 2014, 2014 vs. 2001; Positive AFS, positive acid-fast smear results; Isolation,** respiratory isolation within 7 days.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067.g002](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067.g002)

**Fig 3. Total non-isolated infectious patient-days from hospitalized patients with culture-confirmed tuberculosis, 2001 vs. 2014. Abbreviations: AFS, acid-fast**

smear; ED, emergency department; ICUs, intensive care units. Internal medicine wards: general medicine, cardiovascular medicine, pulmonary medicine, endocrinology, gastro-enterology, hematology, infectious diseases, nephrology, oncology, and paediatrics. Surgical wards: cardiovascular surgery, neurosurgery, otolaryngology, general surgery, chest surgery, proctology, ophthalmology, orthopaedics, plastic surgery, and urology.

[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067.g003](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067.g003)

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067) April 3, 2020 8 / 14

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Impact of fluorescent microscopy on hospital tuberculosis control

detection rate and was associated with a two-fold increase in likelihood of prompt respiratory isolation. A genuine improvement in time-to-respiratory-isolation of hospitalized TB patients should reduce nosocomial TB transmission, especially to HWCs. This is precisely what we observed in Medical Center A. Our previous survey on age/sex-standardised TB incidence ratio of HCWs (using general population as reference)–––the excess TB risk that are attributable to nosocomial TB transmission–––in Medical Center A showed a drop of this risk, from 3.11 in 2006 to 1.37 in 2012 \[23\], and the decrease in time-to-isolation and total non-isolated infec- tious patient-days was in parallel in the present study. Traditional Ziehl-Neelsen staining and conventional light microscopy have unsatisfactory sensitivity in detecting acid-fast bacilli \[24\]. A systematic review showed that, compared with conventional method, fluorescence microscopy has higher sensitivity and similar specificity \[13\]. This present study found that, after switch to fluorescent microscopy, the overall sputum smear detection rate doubled (23% vs. 48%, P<0.001), particularly in patients with non-cavi- tary lung lesions (18.8% to 42.9%, P<0.001) but also in patients with cavitary lesion (43% to 82%, P = 0.029). Furthermore, the superior detection rate of fluorescence microscopy trans- lated to a more timely respiratory isolation. The 20%–40% difference in sensitivity between fluorescence and conventional microscopy from our real life data is much larger than the 10% (on-average) reported in previous studies that compared the diagnostic performance of fluorescent versus conventional microscopy under the optimal conditions \[13\]. This highlights an often overlooked problem of traditional Ziehl-Neelsen staining, i.e. the majority of clinical laboratories just did not have the manpower to adequately check 300 high-power fields \[13\] (which takes around 4 minutes) per sample that are required for conventional microscopy \[24\], particularly in a busy, high clinical case- load settings. In contrast, it takes only 30–60 seconds per sample for an adequate check with fluorescent microscopy \[24\] which would have a decisive advantage in the real world implementation. Although TB-PCR has been considered an important rapid diagnostic tool, this study did not show a significant role of TB-PCR in the reduction in time-to-respiratory isolation from 2001 to 2014. There were several probable reasons. First, the low adoption rate (due to cost issues) may not be enough to make an impact on shortening the overall infectious duration. Second, because of the lower sensitivity of TB-PCR in smear-negative respiratory specimens, TB-PCR was performed predominantly in specimens with positive AFS to distinguish M. _tuberculosis from non-tuberculous mycobacteria. The negative result does not exclude the pos-_ sibility that universal use of automatic TB-PCR, such as Xpert1 MTB/RIF, may further shorten the time to respiratory isolation. In keeping with previous observations (S3 Table), the absence of cough and other typical symptoms is a barrier to prompt respiratory isolation of TB patients (S2 Table). Another cause of delay is hospitalization due to comorbidities, a problem that was previously neglected or confused with the lack of typical clinical presentations. To distinguish these two different situa- tions, we defined hospitalization due to comorbidities as the reason of admission being for the management of acute complications from non-infectious diseases, while lack of typical presen- tation was defined as the absence of prolonged cough for more than 3 weeks, clinical suspicion of pulmonary TB based on chest radiography, or already having a confirmed diagnosis. Multi- variable regression established that hospitalization due to comorbidities was a risk factor inde- pendent from lack of typical presentations (Table 2). The diverse distribution of hospitalized infectious TB patients across 25 medical/surgical sub-specialities wards/units (S2 and S3 Figs) further supports that hospitalization of patients with undiagnosed TB for treatment of comorbidities is an unrecognized but important issue

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067) April 3, 2020 9 / 14

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Impact of fluorescent microscopy on hospital tuberculosis control

requiring to be addressed. The HCWs in specialties units often concentrate on the manage- ment of acute complications of non-infectious chronic diseases and are not trained or pre- pared for diagnosing concomitant TB in their patients. The 2003 large nosocomial TB outbreak in Taipei \[18\] involving more than 65 HCWs, occurred exactly under such scenario —an elderly patient with acute stroke was hospitalized to a rehabilitation unit, without being suspected to also have active TB. The harm is two-way. First, the patients are at increased risk for morbidities and mortality from delayed diagnosis and treatment of TB. Second, the HCWs are at increased risk of nosocomial TB outbreak, which could be fatal if the strain is multidrug- resistant or extensively drug-resistant \[25\]. The interplay between TB and chronic diseases further complicates the clinical scenarios. Chronic non-communicable diseases increase the risk of TB—the associations have been well established for diabetes mellitus \[26\] and rheumatoid arthritis treated with anti-tumour necro- sis factor (TNF) agents \[27\]. On the other hand, TB may increases the risk of complications from chronic diseases, e.g. hyperglycaemia in diabetes mellitus and ischemic stroke in people with atherosclerosis \[28\]. Moreover, certain risk factor, such as smoking, increases the risk of both TB and chronic diseases \[29\]. Therefore, hospitalization of undiagnosed TB patients for treatment of comorbidities is more than just a coincidence by chance. In low HIV prevalence countries, TB is a disease of elderly \[30\]. With population aging, concurrence of TB and comorbidities could be an increasing challenge to clinicians. Currently, most hospitals in Taiwan still used traditional Ziehl-Neelsen staining (or Kinyoun staining, a similar method) and conventional light microscopy in laboratory diagno- sis of TB. An analysis of 2003–2010 Taiwan National Health Insurance database revealed that frequent exposure to hospital environment is a risk factor for contracting TB in Taiwan (adjusted odds ratio: 1.77, for those with 30 outpatient care visit annually) \[31\]. Our findings on the impact of switching to auramine-rhodamine staining with fluorescence microscopy suggest that a nationwide adoption and roll-out might cut the risk of nosocomial TB transmis- sion to both patients and healthcare workers. To address the remaining barriers to respiratory isolation of hospitalized TB patients, “FAST (Find cases Actively by cough surveillance and rapid molecular sputum testing, Sepa- rate safely, and Treat effectively based on rapid drug susceptibility test)” is an option to decrease the time to respiratory isolation \[32, 33\] although the substantial cost of rapid molec- ular testing could be a barrier to NHI reimbursement. Alternatively, environmental controls— the second level in the hierarchy of TB control—with adequate ventilation (>6–12 air changes per hour) or upper room ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (to disinfect the air) can be applied to reduce the concentration of infectious droplet nuclei in hospital indoor air, and decrease risk of nosocomial transmission \[6, 34\]. The present study has several important limitations. First, it was not a randomized con- trolled trial (which cannot be performed in the context, due to ethical reasons). Physician edu- cation and expansion of respiratory isolation facilities were simultaneously implemented along with the switching to fluorescence microscopy during the same intervention period. Neverthe- less, we applied multivariable regression and causal mediation analyses to estimate the effect attributable to switching to fluorescence microscopy. Second, the study hospital closely fol- lowed the national guidance on nosocomial TB control policies issued by Taiwan CDC. There- fore, our findings might not be generalizable to hospitals with less proficiency. Third, the study hospital is a medical center, and therefore might not represent situations in smaller hos- pitals. Nevertheless, under NHI in Taiwan, people can and did directly seek health care in medical centers, without the need of referral from general practitioners. The 3 million annual outpatient visits and more than 90 thousand hospitalizations per year in the study hospital were predominantly from primary care services, rather than tertiary referral care. Finally,

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067) April 3, 2020 10 / 14

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Impact of fluorescent microscopy on hospital tuberculosis control

since Taiwan has a low HIV prevalence \[35\], only two of TB patients had HIV coinfection in our study. Thus, our conclusions might not be generalized to countries with a high HIV prevalence. In conclusion, highly sensitive rapid diagnostic tools could substantially improve timing of respiratory isolation and reduce risk of nosocomial tuberculosis transmission in high TB risk settings. Lack of typical presentations and hospitalization due to comorbidities continued to be main reasons of delayed isolation. Studies will be required to assess whether routine sputum smear or TB-PCR of all hospitalized patients with cough or abnormal chest radiograph is effec- tive in overcoming these remaining barriers.

## Supporting information

## S1 Table. Tuberculosis control practices, 2001–2014.

(DOCX)

## S2 Table. Non-isolated infectious duration of hospitalized patients (at the first admission

## after the index culture).

(DOCX)

## S3 Table. Studies which investigating the factors associated with delayed respiratory isola-

## tion of hospitalized patients with pulmonary tuberculosis.

(DOCX)

**S1 Fig. Causal mediation analyses of the effect mediated by the higher rate of early order-** **ing (less than 4 days after admission) of smear/culture in 2014.** (DOCX)

## S2 Fig. Number of infectious tuberculosis patients in 25 medical/surgical subspecialty

## wards/units in 2001 and 2014.

(DOCX)

## S3 Fig. Total non-isolated infectious patient-days in 25 medical/surgical subspecialty

## wards/units in 2001 and 2014.

(DOCX)

## S1 Data.

(XLSX)

**Acknowledgments**

We thank all staff in the hospital for their commitment to improving patient safety and reduc- ing healthcare-associated infection.

## Author Contributions

## Conceptualization: Chi-Tai Fang, Jung-Der Wang.

## Data curation: Hsin-Yun Sun.

## Funding acquisition: Yee-Chun Chen, Chi-Tai Fang, Jung-Der Wang.

## Methodology: Jann-Yuan Wang, Po-Ren Hsueh, Yi-Hsuan Chen, Yu-Chung Chuang, Chi-

Tai Fang.

## Software: Yi-Hsuan Chen, Yu-Chung Chuang.

PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067) April 3, 2020 11 / 14

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Impact of fluorescent microscopy on hospital tuberculosis control

## Supervision: Yee-Chun Chen, Chi-Tai Fang, Shan-Chwen Chang.

## Writing – original draft: Hsin-Yun Sun.

## Writing – review & editing: Hsin-Yun Sun, Jann-Yuan Wang, Yee-Chun Chen, Po-Ren

Hsueh, Yi-Hsuan Chen, Yu-Chung Chuang, Chi-Tai Fang, Shan-Chwen Chang, Jung-Der Wang.

**References**

**1.** Riley RL, Mills CC, Nyka W, Weinstock N, Storey PB, Sultan LU, et al. Aerial dissemination of pulmo- nary tuberculosis. A two-year study of contagion in a tuberculosis ward. 1959. Am J Epidemiol. 1995; 142(1):3–14. Epub 1995/07/01. [https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a117542](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a117542) PMID: 7785671.
**2.** World Health Organization. Guidelines for prevention of tuberculosis in healthcare facilities in resource- limited settings. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1999.
**3.** Menzies D, Joshi R, Pai M. Risk of tuberculosis infection and disease associated with work in health care settings. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2007; 11(6):593–605. Epub 2007/05/24. PMID: 17519089.
**4.** Gandhi NR, Moll A, Sturm AW, Pawinski R, Govender T, Lalloo U, et al. Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis as a cause of death in patients co-infected with tuberculosis and HIV in a rural area of South Africa. Lancet. 2006; 368(9547):1575–80. Epub 2006/11/07. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-) 6736(06)69573-1 PMID: 17084757.
**5.** Gandhi NR, Weissman D, Moodley P, Ramathal M, Elson I, Kreiswirth BN, et al. Nosocomial transmis- sion of extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis in a rural hospital in South Africa. J Infect Dis. 2013; 207
(1):9–17. [https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jis631](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jis631) PMID: 23166374; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3523793.
**6.** Jensen PA, Lambert LA, Iademarco MF, Ridzon R, Cdc. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of _Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care settings, 2005. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2005; 54(RR-17):1–_
141\. Epub 2005/12/31. PMID: 16382216.
**7.** Goncalves B, Lambert Passos SR, Borges Dos Santos MA, de Andrade CA, Moreira Martins Mde F, de Queiroz Mello FC. Systematic review with meta-analyses and critical appraisal of clinical prediction rules for pulmonary tuberculosis in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2015; 36(2):204–13. Epub 2015/01/31. [https://doi.org/10.1017/ice.2014.29](https://doi.org/10.1017/ice.2014.29) PMID: 25633004.
**8.** Blumberg HM, Watkins DL, Berschling JD, Antle A, Moore P, White N, et al. Preventing the nosocomial transmission of tuberculosis. Ann Intern Med. 1995; 122(9):658–63. Epub 1995/05/01. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.7326/0003-4819-122-9-199505010-00003 PMID: 7702227
**9.** Bock NN, McGowan JE Jr., Ahn J, Tapia J, Blumberg HM. Clinical predictors of tuberculosis as a guide for a respiratory isolation policy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996; 154(5):1468–72. [https://doi.org/10](https://doi.org/10). 1164/ajrccm.154.5.8912766 PMID: 8912766.
**10.** Solari L, Acuna-Villaorduna C, Soto A, van der Stuyft P. Evaluation of clinical prediction rules for respira- tory isolation of inpatients with suspected pulmonary tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2011; 52(5):595–603. Epub 2011/02/05. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciq186](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciq186) PMID: 21292665.
**11.** Rozovsky-Weinberger J, Parada JP, Phan L, Droller DG, Deloria-Knoll M, Chmiel JS, et al. Delays in suspicion and isolation among hospitalized persons with pulmonary tuberculosis at public and private US hospitals during 1996 to 1999. Chest. 2005; 127(1):205–12. [https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.127.1](https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.127.1). 205 PMID: 15653985.
**12.** Greenaway C, Menzies D, Fanning A, Grewal R, Yuan L, FitzGerald JM, et al. Delay in diagnosis among hospitalized patients with active tuberculosis—predictors and outcomes. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002; 165(7):927–33. Epub 2002/04/06. [https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm.165.7.2107040](https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm.165.7.2107040) PMID: 11934716.
**13.** Steingart KR, Henry M, Ng V, Hopewell PC, Ramsay A, Cunningham J, et al. Fluorescence versus con- ventional sputum smear microscopy for tuberculosis: a systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis. 2006; 6
(9):570–81. Epub 2006/08/26. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(06](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(06)) 70578-3 PMID: 16931408.
**14.** Fluorescent light-emitting diode (LED) microscopy for diagnosis of tuberculosis \[Internet\]. 2011. Avail- able from: [https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/44602/9789241501613\_eng.pdf](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/44602/9789241501613_eng.pdf); jsessionid=467249179E61DF6A20B863C0B60260F8?sequence=1.
**15.** Furin J, Cox H, Pai M. Tuberculosis. Lancet. 2019; 393(10181):1642–56. Epub 2019/03/25. [https://doi](https://doi/). org/10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30308-3 PMID: 30904262
**16.** Ngwira LG, Corbett EL, Khundi M, Barnes GL, Nkhoma A, Murowa M, et al. Screening for Tuberculosis With Xpert MTB/RIF Assay Versus Fluorescent Microscopy Among Adults Newly Diagnosed With
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067) April 3, 2020 12 / 14

* * *

Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Rural Malawi: A Cluster Randomized Trial (Chepetsa). Clin Infect
Dis. 2019; 68(7):1176–83. Epub 2018/07/31. [https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciy590](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciy590) PMID: 30059995.
17\. Lo HY, Chou P, Yang SL, Lee CY, Kuo HS. Trends in tuberculosis in Taiwan, 2002–2008. J Formos
Med Assoc. 2011; 110(8):501–10. Epub 2011/07/26. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-6646(11)60076-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-6646(11)60076-4)
PMID: 21783019.
18\. Centers for Disease C, Prevention. Nosocomial transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis found
through screening for severe acute respiratory syndrome—Taipei, Taiwan, 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 2004; 53(15):321–2. Epub 2004/04/23. PMID: 15103296.
19\. Hsieh MJ, Liang HW, Chiang PC, Hsiung TC, Huang CC, Chen NH, et al. Delayed suspicion, treatment
and isolation of tuberculosis patients in pulmonology/infectious diseases and non-pulmonology/infectious diseases wards. J Formos Med Assoc. 2009; 108(3):202–9. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-6646](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-6646)
(09)60053-X PMID: 19293035.
20\. Lin CY, Lin WR, Chen TC, Lu PL, Huang PM, Tsai ZR, et al. Why is in-hospital diagnosis of pulmonary
tuberculosis delayed in southern Taiwan? J Formos Med Assoc. 2010; 109(4):269–77. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/)
10.1016/S0929-6646(10)60052-6 PMID: 20434036.
21\. Taiwan Center for Diseases Control. Guidance on Prevention and Control of Nosocomial Tuberculosis
Transmisison. 2004.
22\. Van Rie A, Fitzgerald D, Kabuya G, Van Deun A, Tabala M, Jarret N, et al. Sputum smear microscopy:
evaluation of impact of training, microscope distribution, and use of external quality assessment guidelines for resource-poor settings. J Clin Microbiol. 2008; 46(3):897–901. Epub 2008/01/05. [https://doi](https://doi/).
org/10.1128/JCM.01553-07 PMID: 18174302; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2268372.
23\. Pan SC, Chen YC, Wang JY, Sheng WH, Lin HH, Fang CT, et al. Tuberculosis in healthcare workers: a
matched cohort study in Taiwan. PLoS One. 2015; 10(12):e0145047. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal).
pone.0145047 PMID: 26679188; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4683009.
24\. Hanscheid T, Ribeiro CM, Shapiro HM, Perlmutter NG. Fluorescence microscopy for tuberculosis diagnosis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2007; 7(4):236–7. Epub 2007/03/23. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(07)](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(07))
70058-0 PMID: 17376374.
25\. Jarand J, Shean K, O’Donnell M, Loveday M, Kvasnovsky C, Van der Walt M, et al. Extensively drugresistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) among health care workers in South Africa. Trop Med Int Health. 2010;
15(10):1179–84. Epub 2010/09/14. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3156.2010.02590.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3156.2010.02590.x) PMID:
20831672.
26\. Jeon CY, Murray MB. Diabetes mellitus increases the risk of active tuberculosis: a systematic review of
13 observational studies. PLoS Med. 2008; 5(7):e152. Epub 2008/07/18. [https://doi.org/10.1371/](https://doi.org/10.1371/)
journal.pmed.0050152 PMID: 18630984; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2459204.
27\. Lin CT, Huang WN, Hsieh CW, Chen YM, Chen DY, Hsieh TY, et al. Safety and effectiveness of tocilizumab in treating patients with rheumatoid arthritis—A three-year study in Taiwan. J Microbiol Immunol
Infect. 2017. Epub 2017/07/25. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmii.2017.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmii.2017.04.002) PMID: 28734675.
28\. Sheu JJ, Chiou HY, Kang JH, Chen YH, Lin HC. Tuberculosis and the risk of ischemic stroke: a 3-year
follow-up study. Stroke. 2010; 41(2):244–9. Epub 2009/12/26. [https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA).
109.567735 PMID: 20035070.
29\. Lin HH, Murray M, Cohen T, Colijn C, Ezzati M. Effects of smoking and solid-fuel use on COPD, lung
cancer, and tuberculosis in China: a time-based, multiple risk factor, modelling study. Lancet. 2008; 372
(9648):1473–83. Epub 2008/10/07. [https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61345-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61345-8) PMID: 18835640;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2652750.
30\. Lee CH, Wang JY, Lin HC, Lin PY, Chang JH, Suk CW, et al. Treatment delay and fatal outcomes of
pulmonary tuberculosis in advanced age: a retrospective nationwide cohort study. BMC Infect Dis.
2017; 17(1):449. Epub 2017/06/26. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-017-2554-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-017-2554-y) PMID: 28646854;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5483299.
31\. Pan SC, Chen CC, Chiang YT, Chang HY, Fang CT, Lin HH. Health care visits as a risk factor for tuberculosis in Taiwan: a population-based case-control study. Am J Public Health. 2016; 106(7):1323–8.
Epub 2016/05/20. [https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2016.303152](https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2016.303152) PMID: 27196655; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC4984759.
32\. Barrera E, Livchits V, Nardell E. F-A-S-T: a refocused, intensified, administrative tuberculosis transmission control strategy. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2015; 19(4):381–4. [https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.14.0680](https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.14.0680)
PMID: 25859991.
33\. Nathavitharana RR, Daru P, Barrera AE, Mostofa Kamal SM, Islam S, Ul-Alam M, et al. FAST implementation in Bangladesh: high frequency of unsuspected tuberculosis justifies challenges of scale-up.
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2017; 21(9):1020–5. Epub 2017/08/23. [https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.16.0794](https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.16.0794)
PMID: 28826452; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5757242.

* * *

**P L O S O N E** Impact of fluorescent microscopy on hospital tuberculosis control

**34.** Centers for Disease Control. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care facilities, 1994. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. MMWR Recomm Rep. 1994; 43(RR-13):1–132. Epub 1994/10/28. PMID: 8602125.
**35.** Statistics of HIV/AIDS. [https://www.cdc.gov.tw/En/Category/MPage/kt6yIoEGURtMQubQ3nQ7pA](https://www.cdc.gov.tw/En/Category/MPage/kt6yIoEGURtMQubQ3nQ7pA) (assessed on November 17, 2019) \[Internet\]. 2019 \[cited November 17, 2019\]. Available from: https:// [www.cdc.gov.tw/En/Category/MPage/kt6yIoEGURtMQubQ3nQ7pA](http://www.cdc.gov.tw/En/Category/MPage/kt6yIoEGURtMQubQ3nQ7pA).
PLOS ONE \| [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230067) April 3, 2020 14 / 14